The German foreign minister later said the 27 countries left in the European Union after Britain's vote to leave should refrain from taking revenge.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier told the ZDF television station there was hard work ahead negotiating the terms of Britain's exit, but European leaders were committed to charting a new course that tackled high rates of youth unemployment and other issues raised through the UK referendum.
Mr Steinmeier said he told EU foreign ministers at a meeting in Luxembourg on Friday to focus on rebuilding a strong Europe, not hashing through differences with Britain.
"We have to accept the decision that was made, and not go looking for revenge," he said.
President Barack Obama released a brief statement on Friday, saying the US respected the decision, and that the relationship between the two countries was "enduring".
"The people of the United Kingdom have spoken, and we respect their decision.  The special relationship between the United States and the United Kingdom is enduring," he said.
He added: "The United Kingdom and the European Union will remain indispensable partners of the United States even as they begin negotiating their ongoing relationship to ensure continued stability, security, and prosperity for Europe, Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the world."
However, the White House on Friday night said that the president stood by his warning that Britain would move to the back of the queue when it comes to trade deals.
"Obviously, the president stands by what he said and I don't have an update of our position," White House spokesman Eric Schultz told reporters at a briefing.
Obama urged Britain to remain in the EU when he visited London in April and warned that a trade agreement between the two countries would not happen anytime soon if Britain left the bloc.
The Pentagon said it was confident that defence ties with Britain would continue and that U.S. Secretary of Defense Ash Carter spoke with his counterpart, Michael Fallon, by phone after Britain voted to leave the European Union.
Speaking with reporters, Peter Cook, spokesman, said the United States was confident that Britain would remain a strong ally in Nato, which "will continue to perform its very important function".
Vladimir Putin has said Britain's vote to leave the EU reflects growing concerns about immigration and security.
Speaking to reporters in Tashkent, the Russian president also said the vote is a response to unhappiness with Brussels bureaucracy.
But he  condemned David Cameron for accusing him of backing Brexit, saying the British Prime Minister's warning that leaving the EU would please the Kremlin was "the lowest level" of politics.
"We followed this with close attention, but we did not in any way influence it and made no attempt to do so," Mr Putin said in comments carried by Russian media.
Mr Putin said Brexit would have both "positive and negative" consequences for Russia and the rest of the world, but that he expected markets to stabilise from the initial shock.
"Life will show us whether there are more plusses or minuses," he said.
The Kremlin earlier said it hopes for an improved "understanding" with post-Brexit Britain, but played down suggestions that the result of Thursday's referendum would benefit Russian foreign policy.
"We hope that in the new reality an understanding of the necessity of building good relations with our country will prevail," Dmitry Peskov, Vladimir Putin's press secretary, said in the Kremlin's first public comment on the vote.
But he said Brexit may not impact the EU's confrontation with Russia over Ukraine and Crimea. "Whether Britain is in the EU or not, there are very different views in Europe with regard to sanctions policy and its effectiveness," he said.
Mr Peskov's cautious remarks contrasted starkly with barely disguised glee amongst hawkish officials in Moscow, who predicted an end to "Anglo-Saxon" - i.e. American - influence in Europe.