Numerous sites with pulp fibre sediments are known along the coast of the Gulf of Bothnia. The pulp fibre sediments from the coast of the Bothnian Sea have been proven to be contaminated by Hg and PCDD/Fs, as well as other POPs. There is still a large need to study how contaminants are mobilised from the sediments, how they are accumulated in benthic organisms, and how they are transferred up through the food web.
Pulp and paper production and wood preservation contributes significantly to the burden of PCDD/Fs in sediments, and contamination by both Hg and PCDD/Fs is expected due to the use of Hg and the unintentional formation of PCDD/Fs in the pulp and paper- and chloralkali industries. Numerous sites with pulp fibre sediments are known along the coast of the Gulf of Bothnia.
The pulp fibre sediments from the coast of the Bothnian Sea have been proven to be contaminated by Hg and PCDD/Fs, as well as other POPs. The range of PCDD/Fs at fibre banks sites is two orders of magnitude, and sediments are also contaminated with PAHs, PCBs, HCB and organochlorine pesticides (OCPs). In the southern parts of the Swedish Bothnian Sea coast, the levels of PCDD/Fs in sediments are the second highest in the whole Baltic.
Levels of PCDD/Fs in sediment and herring along the Baltic coast are correlated. Concentrations of Hg in perch are elevated at locally contaminated pulp fibre sites, and there is a significant positive relationships between total Hg and biomagnifying MeHg in contaminated sediments. This indicates local contamination sources in biota for Hg and POPs.
Even if more is known today about contaminants in pulp fibre sediments than just a few years ago, there still is a large need to study how contaminants are mobilised from the sediments, how they are accumulated in benthic organisms, and how they are transferred up through the food web.
To reverse the trend and lower contamination of biota in the Bothnian Sea (BS), there is a need to examine links between sediment and biota concentrations, processes which may lead to their increased mobilisation, and to develop management strategies.
The Gulf of Bothnia, with its brackish water and extensive land rise, implicates a system with special conditions. The brackish water environment of the Baltic Sea has unique properties to consider when deciding if and how to remediate contaminated sites. Sulphate concentrations are intermediate between those in fresh and marine waters and there is a great influence of allochthonous organic matter from discharging rivers. “Hot-spots” for Hg methylation occur at intermediate sulphide concentrations in estuaries or brackish waters, such as in the Baltic Sea.
Along the Bothnian Sea coast land rise is almost 1 cm year-1. Together with an increased wind speed this could physically disturb inplace sediments, turning accumulation bottoms where fibre sediments are deposited into transportation bottoms. Increased influx of organic matter from rivers may cause oligotrophication due to a shift in food web structure from phytoplankton to bacteria.