THE FRENCH media have warned that the future of the European Union is at risk following the result of the referendum in the UK.
Even before David Cameron delivered his resignation as he addressed the nation from outside 10 Downing Street, French newspapers were lining up to express concern over the vote.
A Le Monde editorial warned that the whole project now faces serious questions. "We believe ... that 'Brexit' will release some of the darkest forces working European views today: regressive nationalism, a rise in far-right protests, and - here and there - threats to democracy," the editorial read.
Le Figaro echoed the sentiment, saying that Britain's Leave vote could trigger a domino effect of countries leaving the EU. "The risk is great as other countries rush into the breach opened by the United Kingdom," it said. Already some politicians, including France's FN leader Marine Le Pen, have started calling for similar referendums in their own countries.
Liberation described the result as 'stunning', adding that it was a 'popular revolt and a stinging defeat' for the outgoing British Prime Minister. But it said that the snub was not hard to explain, condemning the European Union for its absence of a 'common project' and its poor reaction to the refugee crisis.
Les Echos said Friday, June 24, was 'a black day for Europe' and that the result plunged the Union into 'the unknown'. "The choice of the British to leave the Union inflicts a scathing repudiation of the European Union from which it will be difficult to rebound," it said.
Le Point asked: "In choosing the leave the EU, the British have turned an uncertain page. What will be the future relationship be between London and the EU?"
France Soir, meanwhile, said that 'Britons have chosen to leave the EU and take a leap into the unknown'.
Connexion will be providing in-depth coverage of what the result means for Britons in France in our July edition, posted to subscribers on June 28 and on sale in French newsagents  and as a pdf version on sale here later next week. Plus you can sign up for our free Friday newsletter here