Use this tool to calculateconversions between Lbs->Kgs and Inches->CMs.
Get a quick quote, send a parcel and get real-time parcel tracking with the Fastlane iShipper mobile app.
Register with us or open a business account and save an extra 5% on Fastlane’s hugely discounted courier services.
Earn a £1 credit every time you use our UK or international courier services. Refer your friends and earn even more.
Fastlane International offers UK parcel delivery and international shipping to over 220 countries at prices up to 60% lower than the Post Office. We’re one of the longest established, most trusted UK courier companies with over 28 years’ experience. Fastlane offers a comprehensive range of services; UK Next Day Delivery and Same Day Delivery, fast worldwide express courier and cheap courier services for economy shipping.
Fastlane International takes all the complication out of booking a parcel service - three decades of experience means our customers don't need to be experts. Fastlane strategically partners with the world's premier couriers such as UPS, DHL, TNT and DPD to offer reliable delivery you can trust. Our prices are a fraction of the cost of booking direct.
Booking parcel delivery with Fastlane International could not be easier. To send a parcel simply fill in our Quick Quote tool and instantly compare the best prices and express courier services. Choose your preferred option, complete the shipping form, add extra insurance if required and select your collection slot. All Fastlane International courier services are door to door, every shipment comes with parcel tracking and we will produce any customs paperwork you require. Read More
You don't need to register to use us, but registered users are entitled to a further 5% off. If you need a corporate courier, a Fastlane credit account offers 5% discount on all business delivery services.
Fastlane International is proud to be part of the Parcelhero.com group of companies. ParcelHero's consolidated group buying power allows us to offer the best prices for both express courier delivery and economy international shipping.
Fastlane International has 28 years of expertise in UK Parcel Delivery. We offer same day, next day delivery, express courier and timed services at highly discounted prices. We collect same day from most postcodes, and you can book as late as 12 midday in many areas. Whether you need a London courier or a service in Cornwall, Fastlane's UK Parcel Service can't be beaten.
Fastlane International Couriers offers worldwide parcel services to over 220 countries. We offer comprehensive export and import services, and we can collect from most locations the same day. Whether you need an express courier, or economy international shipping, Fastlane makes sending a parcel abroad easy and hassle free. We can even ship large items and pallets.
Fastlane International's UK same day services are fast, reliable and exceptionally cost-effective. Fastlane offers same day delivery across the UK, from a small van to a transit. No matter which same day service you need, we've got it covered. You can book same day services 24 hours a day, seven days a week and, reassuringly, we only offer the best carrier services.
Fastlane International serves thousands of businesses across the UK. From eBay sellers to SMEs to multi-nationals, our Professional courier services provide business-class parcel delivery from the world's best carriers. Corporate account customers also qualify for additional discounts. Fastlane's business delivery services are reliable and extremely cost effective.