Doctors in Sweden are not well paid, particularly surgeons compared to other western countries. Sweden compensates for this by allowing doctors from second world and third world countries to transfer their medical license here. For example, a fair number of countries medical boards, such as Romania, are approved by Sweden but not many other western countries. So, Sweden makes an exception in the area of healthcare in part to cut costs and fill staff requirements.
Sweden uses the French model regarding ethnic minorities and the job market. That is, it buries its head in the sand and says "we are all Swedes". So, since figures on ethnic minorities in white collar jobs does not exist on a historical year to year basis within the official government statistics it is difficult to criticize citing official sources.
From personal experience I would counter Volvoman's statement "once you get into the skilled labour market colour race creed plays ZERO part in things and it is entirely based on skillset" with its probably more like 70 to 80 percent part across the board in Sweden. Various reasons why:
1. In Sweden it is relatively difficult to fire someone therefore, Swedes are very careful about who they hire. Deferring to caution they often hire people with familiar backgrounds and similar schools. The discrimination is not really taking place so much at an employer level across the board but at a national level set by government policy and it is not direct discrimination, imho, rather a side effect of a labor system that encourages stability.
2. Some companies are very open to hiring foreigners. Typically those companies are characterized by:
2A. Doing business internationally. 2B. Developing and young technologies / companies. These companies need employees with an entrepreneurial or "intraprenurial" mindset who are willing to give there all. 2C. Companies owned by a foreign parent company. I have seen firsthand two such companies implement diversity programs within their Swedish branches due to the uniformity of the staff did not fit their sensibilities.
Unfortunately, only a small portion of the available jobs rest in the hands of such companies.
On the other hand, the older and larger companies with well developed human resources departments will fall back on the traditional hiring methods.
Regarding the lorry company the OP mentioned. This is all just speculation...Maybe the employer is not racist, however, perhaps the industry is? Maybe the thought of you representing his company would scare off some of his customers? Maybe he did not want the liability of you stopping at a truck stop and being the victim of a hate crime by a group of polish truckers? Maybe the sight of seeing a person of color driving a lorry is so rare in Scandinavia that he did not want to deal with his truck constantly being reported stolen? Maybe he often loads his trucks to heavy and plans his routes to avoid weigh stations and with a colored driver the chance of being indiscriminately stopped is higher? None of these reasons for not hiring you are fair and just but the world is neither a fair nor just place unless you fight to make it so...
3. At the end of the day life is a lot easier for foreigners if they just accept what Sweden is and is not. Basically, Sweden is a country wrapped in very pretty packaging but after opening the box one finds various ill fitting bits and bobs and a bag of manure or two along with an Allen wrench to put it all together. However, this experience is not unique to Sweden most countries mythologize themselves as something they are not and spend great resources "educating" their citizenry with that propaganda for about the first 18 years of those citizens lives. Those who defend their country are indoctrinated and brainwashed, those that attack another country will face a mob of stalwart brainwashed defenders...so your approach is wrong OP.
Instead, figure out what the Swedish psychology is and then design a product around it...as a primitive example, start a T-Shirt company with a local Swede. Sell, "F*ck Foreigner" T-Shirts at Swedish Democrat rallies and "I HEART foreigners" at all other rallies. Make your money and laugh all the way to the bank. In other words, play whatever strengths you have against the societies weaknesses and you will come out ahead...if you don't do that they will keep playing their strengths against your weaknesses...