We rent cribs, high chairs, strollers, car seats, and other quality baby equipment. If you don’t see something on our site that you would like to rent, please let us know and we may be able to supply it for you! We do not have any metal cribs at any Baby’s Away locations. Those types of cribs are more for “institutional” settings and we prefer to offer cribs that are comfortable for baby and also pleasing to look at. We don’t nickle and dime you either. No extra charges for stairs, extra linens and other “add on’s” other companies charge. We simply add delivery fee and sales taxes.
We specialize in long term corporate rentals. If you are looking for monthly rates, just give us a call and we will quote you a price. Planning ahead for the holidays? We encourage you to make reservations early so that we can be sure to have the baby equipment available for you!
We will deliver the rented items at your destination and pick them up after you leave giving you more time to enjoy your visit. We love to baby our customers and guarantee you will be happy with our service. We aim to please…always with a smile!
Baby’s Away – Tucson provides service to all of Tucson and the following cities/areas around Tucson:
* Some cities/areas may be subjected to higher delivery rates
You can cancel an order anytime up to 24 hours prior to the arrival date. Any cancellation within 24 hours to the arrival date is subject to a $25 cancellation fee.
Daily Delivery Hours:
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (Extended delivery times available for additional fee.)
Please note – We like to have a 24 hour notice for all deliveries. If less than 24 hour notice, we will try to accommodate if we have a delivery time slot available. We don’t charge extra for same or next day service and do everything possible to work you into our schedule.
Office Hours:
Monday thru Friday 9:00 AM to 5:00 PM
Saturday and Sunday – Office Closed – but we still deliver
Closed Christmas Day, New Years Day, Easter, Memorial Day, Labor Day, 4th of July and Thanksgiving.