The Swedish State Commission of
Fantasies, SCF, 21 years
On 28 September 2016, it will be 22 years
since the M/S Estonia sank in the Baltic Sea 1994 and
the Prime Minister Carl Bildt ordered SCF to show that the
visor had fallen off and caused the accident. Bildt knew
that the M/S Estonia transported military contraband
and that certain parties did not like it. The SCF Director
General Olof Forssberg was eager to help Bildt and SCF
shipbuilding technical expert, my old friend, navy commander
Börje Stenström invented the following
fantasies:
The visor was wrongly constructed since
1980, when the ferry was built, it was full hurricane during
the night of the accident, the ferry was travelling at too
high speed due to an incompetent commander and huge waves
struck off the visor 01.15 hrs without a single
person aboard noticing it, the visor then pulled open the
ramp, so that hundreds of tons of water could silently flood
into the superstructure, when the ferry's bow dipped
under water every ten seconds, the ferry heeled more than
30° after a few minutes and turned 180° south and
east, when the engines stopped, Estonia then capsized but
floated upside down and drifted eastward at high
speed, but suddenly sank completely at 1.53 hrs a
mile east of where the visor had fallen off at 01.15
hrs, several hundred people managed to get out to the open
decks during 10 minutes, but only 137 survived, because they
did not understand that they must swim and crawl up into the
life rafts thrown into the water, the ferry was fully
seaworthy on departure despite there were 22 open,
watertight doors in the hull, which was not allowed, etc,
The German shipyard that built the ferry
for protected coastal Finland/Sweden trade suggested that
the ferry was perhaps not well maintained after the first
owner went bankrupt about 1989, people who suggested that
the ferry might have sank due to leakage below the
waterline, which should be investigated, were declared to be
idiots by SCF (media happily transmitted that message) and
were blamed in the media to be unintelligent, unscientific
and unreasonable conspiracy theorists, whose sole purpose
was to topple the government, the visor was found after a
while almost one mile west of the wreck, it was said, and it
was salvaged by the Swedish Navy, which however could not
tell where it took place, after almost three years of
accident investigation Börje Stenström died
suddenly of cancer, it was sadly said, and Director General
Olof Forssberg took the opportunity to announce that he
forgot to register a letter, what a serious error!, so he
was unable to complete the fantasy investigations and a new
female fat DG had to do it, who then published a final
report in December 1997 that no one was basically happy
with, for example, the sinking was not explained, i.e. how
and why the ferry sank after floating upside down,
etc., etc., which led to numerous parliamentary debates with
Mona Sahlin until the government decided in 2005 that it,
i.e. the sinking process, would scientifically be
clarified by independent but very well-paid experts from
Sweden, Scotland, Germany and Holland, which was completed
in 2008, the explanation was that the M/S Estonia
floated upside down due to the trapped air in the hull but
the air was compressed, etc., for 30 minutes, which had
never happened sooner or later, so the ferry sank. The
experts declared this while licking the Bildt ass. As if it
were something? No. Most Swedes just do as they are told
from above. Easiest way!
You can read more about all those strange
fantasies in the links at the bottom of this web page. There
I am not satirical!
The M/S Estonia 1994 sinking killing
>850 persons was still not explained September 2014! So
far only pseudo scientific info has been
presented (5 December 2014 and
up-dated later)
More than 20 years have passed since
M/S Estonia sank due to hull leakage below waterline
28 September 1994 probably due to sabotage. The ship carried
military cargo protected by Swedish police and military
aboard. The ship was not seaworthy at departure due
to lack of correct lifesaving equipment and watertight hull
subdivision. A false cause of incident was invented; a weak
bow visor that dropped off. The cover-up of the incident is
a success 2015.
You have to admit that the Swedish
cover-up of the crime of evil people works fine.
On 20 September 2014 various memorial
events took place to honour the dead. Mainstream media
reported these events. Media also repeated the old, official
explanations/lies what happened 20 years ago. The visor fell
off and water was loaded in the superstructure.
However it was not explained then how the ship sank, i.e.
lost its buoyancy produced by the hull. And they
didn't report what could have had happened -
proposal #1 or
proposal
#2 (formulated already
2001!)
Media thought 2014 that the incident was
fully explained 1997 and was completely resolved and that
any publicity about other theories is an insult to
governments and authorities. I just want to be helpful. It
is not popular.
Media forget that the sinking was
supposedly scientifically explained 2008 at high
costs by five scientific institutions: SSPA
& Chalmers University of
Gothenburg, Sweden,
Safety at
Sea, Ltd and University of
Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland and MARIN, Delft,
Netherlands.
Media forgot 2014 to mention that
a very
strange sinking was presented
2008 using pseudoscientific methods.
Which means that the sinking is still not
explained 2015!
All links to the scientific reports by
SSPA &
Chalmers University of
Gothenburg, Sweden, and
Safety at
Sea, Ltd , Scotland, paid for
by Swedish taxpayers, stopped working many years ago and do
not work any more (September 2014). You should wonder why.
Luckily the SSPA
Final report is
available.
The objective of the scientific project
was as per Swedish government clear instructions 2005 to
scientifically explain the sinking, i.e. loss of
buoyancy of the ferry based on the alleged factual
findings of the JAIC investigation 1994-1997, i.e.
i) the visor fell off at
01.15 hrs and pulled open the ramp
protecting the superstructure and
ii) water was loaded in the
superstructure 2.5 meter above waterline in severe
weather, so that
iii) the ferry
heeled/capsized/floated/drifted upside down for a
certain time and
iv) after having turned 180° upside
down and drifted more than a mile at high speed the
vessel
No buoyancy was lost until after
the capsize, so the objective of the whole project
was to establish why the floating, capsized ship with intact
hull lost buoyancy and sank.
JAIC, the official accident investigation
commission had 1994-1997 forgotten to explain the
sinking of the ferry, i.e. how water loaded in the
superstructure caused sinking i.e. loss of
buoyancy of the hull while drifting.
Swedish SSPA studies of records and
scientific model tests showed that >2 000 tons/min water
was loaded into the superstructure starting at
01.02 hrs (not 01.14 hrs as per JAIC
picture above) and that the ferry was heeling >40°
after two minutes at 01.04 hrs (and not
only 15°) and then stopped heeling.
These events were evidently not according
to the JAIC 1994-1997 findings, where sudden heeling started
at 01.15 hrs but stopped at
<15°, so that, say 400+ persons aboard could
evacuate to open decks during 10 minutes.
All 130+ survivors reported that the ship
never remained at heel >40° after the first
heeling/severe rolling but uprighted and was not heeling so
much so they could escape. You wonder why the scientists
decided otherwise.
The Swedish scientists, generously paid
to to be politically correct and to maintain social order in
their country, whose government used M/S Estonia to carry
and smuggle military equipment, suggested 2008 that the
vessel, still floating on the intact hull with heel
>40°, then, after turning port 180°, didn't
immediately capsize and float upside down.
Reason was the buoyancy of an
intact deck house above the suprerstructure! JAIC
suggested 1994-1997 that the deck house
(green
in picture below) was flooded immediately, when it was
submerged, as all deck house windows were broken at once.
The Swedish scientists, to be politically correct, to lie
and to maintain social order in their country, suggested
2008 that only a few windows were broken and that the ferry
floated on the windows not broken, i.e. no water entered the
deck house
in picture below):
The Swedish scientists at SSPA/Chalmers
thus suggested 2008, without any evidence, that the almost
intact deck house (built of 4 mm steel plates with 100's of
windows) prevented capsize, i.e. turning and floating upside
down, for 20 minutes. Like this:
No ship can float like
this! According Strathclyde
University it can in faked, criminal animations! Antti Arak
and Ain-Alar Juhanson are the two persons on the bow of M/S
Estonia. They
say (actually
lie!) that they walked on the horizontal side of the ship to
the bow and climbed down on a closed ramp, the ship was
rolling in full storm, when the list was 90° at around
01.30 hrs ... and that the visor was missing!
This magic event was confirmed by model
tests of the Dutch MARIN company; it took twenty
minutes (!) to fill up the deck house if only a few
windows were broken, according Dutch scientists.
But there was no evidence that only a few
thin window panes broke. The scientists just invented it.
Nobody bothered to explain how the 137
survivors managed to get out of the ship at >40°
However, when the deck house was
finally full of water at 01.30 hrs, the ship, still
floating on its intact hull, capsized and
floated upside down according Archimedes and
Swedish
model tests and
Scottish
calculations. How the then
upside down floating ship later sank is not
explained.
All persons - probably >250 - on open
decks or on the side of the ferry jumped into the cold water
and swam to rafts that had been dropped into the sea - an
illegal procedure. Most drowned. Some survivors were sitting
on the bottom of the upside down floating ship until
they were swept away.
And then the floating ferry
drifted upside down a mile at 2.2 knots speed and suddenly
sank at 01.50 hrs stern first according JAIC.
The Swedish and Scottish scientists
explained 2008 the reason for sinking being that
buoyancy (compressed air inside the capsized, intact
hull floating upside down) starting at 01.30 hrs disappeared
(!) during 20 minutes; buoyancy
air inside the hull disappeared by compression of the air
starting at the stern.
Archimedes principle didn't work!
Chalmers
University has decided to
verify this mystery 2014!
It could not happen in model scale and
model tests or in reality, so in scientific model tests the
air escaped through two valves in the bottom of the
model.
The Scottish
scientists (actually an
Austrian underpaid student) made full scale computer
animations of the loading of water into the superstructure,
the heeling to 40°, the floating on the deck house, the
capsize upside down, the drifting and sinking that confirmed
or copied the Swedish/Dutch model tests; vessel heeled
>40° in two minutes, it took then 20 minutes to
flood the deck house, then capsize upside down followed and
another 20 minutes was required to slowly sink stern first
due to buoyancy being lost due to air slowly (!)
being compressed in the intact hull starting aft. By
manipulating the software and the input a fantastic
animation was produced Hollywood style.
Imagine that air is slowly compressed by
water, when a ship floats upside down! It is really magic.
And it started at the stern! It was the first and only
time in history such sinking of a ship with intact hull
happened.
Nobody managed to explain 2008 how a
capsized, sinking vessel could drift at 2.2 knots upside
down. If you asked that question, you were immediately
attacked and asked to shut up and not to disturb the social
order protecting corrupt, lying government officials and
well paid scientists.
There is evidently no evidence anywhere
that the alleged scientific findings 2008 of the
Swedish, Dutch and Scottish scientists are correct but
nobody, except Heiwa Co, seems to care 2014. The
findings were just politically correct (i.e. lies or fraud
to maintain social order) generously paid for by the Swedish
government and its Ministry of Defence and that's what
counts in Sweden 1994-2014. When Heiwa Co published evidence
(see below links) and suggested scientific fraud by
Strathclyde
and Chalmers
universities, the Scots
threatened to sue Heiwa Co. They never did it in the
end, because they would have lost. But it seems they got
away with the fraud assisted by media and authorities.
Question is only for how long. Hopefully they will be put in
jail 2016.
M/S Estonia was 28 September 1994 allegedly
sailing at much too great speed in very severe weather in
the Baltic ... and nobody noticed it aboard in bars,
restaurants, casino and in the wheelhouse. Few were seasick
- the ship just rolled and pitched normally. The visor at
the front of the superstructure was suddenly ripped off by
big wave impacts ... and nobody heard anything. The ramp
protecting the opening into the superstructure was also
ripped open by big wave forces ... nobody heard anything.
And 200 tons of water was loaded 10 times into the
superstructure ... and nobody heard or saw anything even if
the light was on in the superstructure ... . Prime minister
Carl Bildt made up this fairy tale the same day ... and
there we are today 2014. To be politically correct you MUST
believe it! If not ...
The prorector of Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, CTH,
Mats Viberg and
others have appointed Karin
Andersson as new prefect of the CTH
department of Shipping and marine technology until
2014-12-31 and Mats has asked Karin to check about the
alleged scientific fakery done
there 2006-2009 by professor Olle Rutgersson
and dr. Claes Källström, SSPA Marin AB (a
fully owned company of CTH).
The result of the review of the alleged fakery by Karin
Anderssin will be published here. It is a simple
question:
The answer came 2014. Yes it can! The principle of
Archimedes does not apply in Sweden! More in Swedish
RMS Titanic 1912 sinking explained
2013 No
iceberg. Just the usual MV Estonia style collusion!
Happens at sea all the time.
December 2012 I was invited to an August 2013 conference
at Evanston, USA, to discuss structures (not Estonia) and
present a paper. A week prior the opening the invitation was
withdrawn! It feels like Estonia. When they do not like the
music, they shoot the pianist.
Jutta Rabe ëxplains in German how M/S Estonia
was leaking, how Swedish Ministry of Defence called, etc,
The German
report update is
interesting to read March 2013:
What does it really mean? Until she had capsized? How can
a ship capsize - and float upside down - if the visor
remains attached? How could any water enter the
superstructure when the bow opening was closed?
Anybody that can explain how a capsized ship, which
floats upside down for four minutes, then sinks during 18
minutes should have no problems with the Heiwa
Challenge.
"When windows on the accommodation decks
(i.e. in the deck house decks 4 - 9)
were broken by wave forces, subsequent
.... sinking
inevitable".
Many persons suggest it is a lost cause to explain the
M/S Estonia's mysterious sinking 1994 but I do not
believe in lost causes!
Scientific fraud at
Strathclyde
and Chalmers
Universities 2008 to cover-up the truth about the sinking of
the M/S Estonia 1994.
Foreword
1999 explains everything about the Estonia
accident cover-up
"It should be remembered that Carl Bildt was the
father of the "bow visor" lie, which was used to explain the
sinking of Estonia on September 28, 1994. The Swedish-owned
passenger ferry, which sank with an estimated 1,000 lives
lost including 502 Swedes, was being used in an ongoing
operation to smuggle stolen Soviet military technology -
with the approval of then prime minister Bildt and the head
of the Swedish military. Sweden was evidently being used as
a transit point for the contraband, which was being
forwarded on to Israel from Arlanda airport - without being
inspected by Swedish customs on entry or exit from
Sweden."
M/V 'Al Salam
Boccaccio 98', February 3,
2006 Why is it,
that whenever a serious incident occurs at sea with many
killed, that the maritime authorities invent a completely
unrealistic cause?
Scientific
fraud is permitted at Strathclyde
University
Subject matter has been raised and investigated.
Professor Jim McDonald, FREng FRSE FIET FInstP, Principal
and Vice Chancellor of Strathclyde University have been
investigating for several months! It seems fraud is
permitted.
Naval Architect,
journal of the Royal Institution of Naval
Architects in London writes on pp 28-42 in the September
2010 issue about the Estonia accident and quotes the info of
Heiwa Co that has been censored by the authorities
since 1994 - the defective watertight doors.
Estonia Investigation demanded
(15 March 2009) Swedish MPs Jan Erik
Ågren (-), Per Bolund (mp), Kent Härstedt (s) and
Aleksander Gabelic (s) demand 091002 a new investigation of
the Estonia sinking 1994!
The reasons are results from latest work carried out
at the request of Vinnova (The Swedish Governmental Agency
for Innovation Systems) by various research institutions.
Some persons participating in the studies suggest that past
investigations of the cause of the accident are not
sufficient for complete clarity. The
Joint Accident Investigation Commission, JAIC, working
1994-1997 never studied or explained the causes for the
sudden sinking.
The Vinnova research was presented during 2008 at a
demonstration of model tests at Chalmers University 3 April
and at a symposium at Stockholm 23 May.
At the model tests it was clearly shown that the
vessel capsized and floated upside
down, which, according JAIC, didn’t happen 1994.
Furthermore it is now shown that three persons in the engine
room must have evacuated latest 01.06-01.07 hrs and not
after 01.23 hrs or later as suggested by JAIC.
The examples just show two circumstances that the JAIC
investigation is full of important errors. Another serious
fault is that questionings of survivors were done
unprofessionally more to confirm one event than to find out
all circumstances. The JAIC was not independent. It
consisted of hand picked representatives of Sweden, Estonia
and Finland.
Several expert reports, results of divings the days
after the accident and other information suggest that the
description of JAIC in its report – that the visor
dropped off – does not satisfactorily explain the
speedy sinking of the M/S Estonia 1994. The uncertainty
about cause and sinking must be removed and a responsible
party identified.
These factors taken together are good reasons to appoint
one from Sweden, Finland and Estonia independent and
international investigation about the sinking of the ship,
the four MPs say.
The suggestion will be dealt with by the Parliament in
2010. On 3rd March 2010 Swedish Parliament decided to do
nothing - without discussion or voting!
Safety
at Sea Ltd, 280 St Vincent Street, Glasgow, G2 5RL,
UK has on 17
November 2009 asked Heiwa Co to remove the following
web pages/articles from this web site within 15 days:
Safety at Sea Ltd suggests that Heiwa Co
questions the intellectual and professional independence and
the technical competency of Safety at Sea Ltd and/or
its staff. It is further suggested that criticism by
Heiwa Co is not scientific and that the objective is
to annoy and damage the reputation of Safety at Sea
Ltd and/or its staff.
The Safety at Sea Ltd report
May 2008 is evidently a review, where the JAIC
scenario is modified but it is still maintained that >4
000 tons of water was loaded in the M/V Estonia
superstructure within a few minutes causing a list of
>47°, etc. There is nothing there to annoy or damage
anybodies reputation. Evidently you cannot load >4 000
tons of water at open seas into a cargo space full of cars
and trucks, while nobody hears it and when the light in the
hold is still on!
It is further suggested by Safety at Sea Ltd that
the condition with 47° list is stable; the ferry is
floating on the deckhouse for 20-30 minutes! This is also
wrong! The submerged deckhouse does not provide any
buoyancy, all side windows are smashed at once and the ferry
should capsize at once and then float upside down.
It is finally suggested by Safety at Sea Ltd that,
when the ferry floats upside down after capsize and bouyancy
is provided by air inside the hull and displaced bouyant
materials (as seen in model tests and verified by
calculations), it will slowly sink! Buoyancy is slowly lost
during 15 minutes! The Safety at Sea Ltd explanations
for this are also wrong.
Ferry floating after
capsize - it cannot sink! Suggesting anything else, e.g. air
leaking out, is fraud!
The following links are news items prior to and after
Heiwa Co:s review. These references pose similar
unanswered questions. It is then also concluded that model
tests and computer simulations are falsified by SSPA
(model tests) and Safety at Sea Ltd (computer
simulations) to achieve the requested results. Heiwa
Co conclusions are evidently supported by facts and
calculations as provided in the links.
The last link is the Preamble to a book originally
written 2002 that summarizes the whole thing long before
Safety at Sea Ltd got involved.
Heiwa Co:s recommendation to Safety at Sea
Ltd in order to save its intellectual and professional
independence and its technical competency is that it
publicly withdraws its reports and computer simulations of
the Estonia accident with the explanation that they contain
serious errors. Let's do that within 15 days!
TV-program about M/V Estonia -
Friday 16 October 2009 French TV-company
FR3/Thalassa sent a 30 minutes reportage about the latest
investigations of the M/V Estonia disaster with info of
Heiwa Co! Link
to program .
The Films by M/V Finnmerchant
of the Rescue
M/V Finnmerchant
arrived at 03.25 hrs at the site of accident on 28 September
1994 and when dawn arrived they filmed rafts and
helicopters. As you can see, the weather was not too bad. No
10 metres waves as JAIC reported, etc.
147 Estonians demand a new
Investigation! The Government refuses!
(27 July 2009)
Books 'Disaster Investigation' and
'Lies and Truths about the M/V Estonia Accident' now
available in pdf Format! (13 June
Very easy to
examine the Estonia Hull
(4 April 2009) Many experts have recently
suggested that the underwater hull of MS Estonia must
be re-examined. It is very easy! The whole underwater hull
is accessible on the sea floor - both the flat hull bottom
and the hull sides up to the waterline and to the main deck
fender. All parts of the underwater hull are above the mud
line. All areas can be marked up by divers and then filmed
by ROV.
Report of
the Committee of Experts formed for the investigation of
circumstances related to the transport of equipment for
military use on the passenger ferry Estonia in September
1994 (2 March
2009) On 16 February 2009 Margus Kurm, Chairman of the
Committee, Leading Public Prosecutor, handed in subject
report to the Estonian government. It was the result of the
Committee studying the latest research studies done by the
SSPA consortium and the HSVA/TUHH consortium 2006-2008.