After months of nervous speculation, Germany brought war
to western Europe on May 10, 1940,
with the primary goal of conquering France.
German bombers hit air bases in France, Luxembourg, Belgium,
and the Netherlands, destroying large numbers of Allied planes
on the ground and crippling Allied air defenses. Elite
squads of German paratroopers were dropped onto fortified Allied
points along the front, neutralizing a key element of France’s defense
strategy.
On the ground, German forces advanced in two
directions: one through the Netherlands and northern Belgium (where
Britain and France had expected) and the other, larger force to
the south, through Luxembourg and into the Ardennes
Forest on a path that led directly into the French heartland.
Unaware of the German advance to the south, Britain and France sent
the bulk of their troops to Belgium.
During the first days of the attack, the Germans made
slower progress toward Brussels and The Hague than expected, as
the Dutch forces fought back formidably. In response, on May 14,
the German air force, the Luftwaffe, unleashed a massive
bombing attack on central Rotterdam, even while surrender
negotiations with the Netherlands were under way. Although efforts
were made to call off the attack at the last minute, only some of
the German pilots got the message, so part of the attack was carried
out. Over 800 civilians
were killed, and the Netherlands surrendered that day.
The British and French plan to defend Belgium was
to make a stand at a line of forts between the cities of Antwerp
and Liege. Unaware that these forts had already been captured by
German paratrooper units on the first night of the invasion, the
British and French armies found themselves under assault on May 13.
At the same time, the second, unexpected German offensive to the
south emerged from the Ardennes Forest. Over the next few days,
the main Allied armies were trapped between the two German forces,
able neither to protect Paris nor to stop the Germans from advancing
to the English Channel. Then, when the German troops to the south
moved between the French and British forces, the Allies were divided
and thus weakened further still. The Allied defense of Belgium was unequivocally
a disaster.
While the main French army was trapped between the two
German armies, the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) was
being pushed to the coast near the French port of Dunkirk.
With the BEF cornered with its back to the sea, and with little
hope of reuniting with French forces, the British government decided
that the BEF had to be evacuated. The evacuation, called Operation
Dynamo, began on May 27, 1940.
It took a full week to accomplish, using more than 800 civilian
and military sea vessels. In all, more than 300,000 men
were brought back across the English Channel to British soil. The
feat was heroic—it was done under nearly constant bombardment from the
Luftwaffe—but it left France completely on its own.
With the British out of the way, the Germans began their
final push against France. By June 12,
German tanks had broken through the main fronts along the Somme
River and the fortified Maginot Line, moving
ever closer to their goal, Paris. During this time,
the British vigorously encouraged France to resist at all costs.
The new British prime minister, Winston Churchill,
even flew to Paris himself to offer his personal encouragement.
At the same time, though, the British government denied French requests
for military assistance, wanting to conserve strength for Britain’s
own defense in the near future.