Custom Landscape Materials, LLC operates three hard rock  quarries and produces aggregate at all locations. The result of excavating and  crushing hard rock is that in the ABC (aggregate base course) there is negligible clay silt  contamination.
West Valley Rock is the  largest supplier of aggregate in Arizona and Southern California. Custom Landscape Materials, LLC operates three hard rock  quarries and produces aggregate at all locations.
Our   quarry sites, which cover at least 300 acres of mining area, are capable of  producing more than 5000 tons of gravel per day. We also produce rip rap,  boulders, and other stone products. Meanwhile, we have a fleet of trucks that is  always ready for any delivery task. We primarily cater to contractors,  builders, community associations, landscapers, property developers, and DIY  homeowners. With our capacity and available resources, you will surely complete  your project on time or even ahead of schedule.
Please contact us today at  (623) 386-8777 for your inquiries or orders.
Decomposed granite is  commonly used for landscaping, property improvements, and other masonry  applications. It is widely used in residential and commercial concreting  projects. Crushed granite is usually mixed with resin to form a composite  similar to asphalt. You can use this material on driveways, garden pathways,  patios, walkways, trails, and other high foot traffic areas. Some landscapers  use this aggregate as mulching material because it improves drainage and  provides additional minerals to the plantings.
It is easy to spruce up your  outdoors if you use decorative aggregates. These carefully selected gravel and  other types of stones are mainly used for landscaping and hardscaping projects.  We have decorative river rocks for your garden, as well as multi-colored gravel  for your hardscape features and other masonry applications.
West Valley Rock can  supply any amount of road base material for clients and contractors anywhere in  Arizona. Our aggregate products have been tested using the ASTM C131 standards.  They are guaranteed tough and perfect base materials for road and railroad  foundations.
The drainage has  important roles in your home or commercial property. It must be carefully  planned and built according to industry specifications. You should use the  right types of materials and ensure that they are durable and long-lasting. The  quality of the aggregate that will be used for the drainage system is another  factor that you have to consider.
You need the right size  and type of aggregate to ensure the proper functioning of your French drains  and retaining wall drains. If you are working on septic drain fields and road  side edge drains, please contact us at West Valley Rock. We have a special  selection of aggregates for these types of projects.
We deliver to all of Arizona and Southern California, including: