A year ago, these strains didn’t raise an eyebrow. Today, against the background of the Ukraine crisis, it has entirely new significance. Russians in Estonia tend to take Moscow’s view of the conflict, I was told by both Estonians and Russians. They sympathize with the Russian separatists, Putin’s resuscitated Russian empire and the protectorate role that Moscow claims to be playing. This means they view membership in NATO and its presence in the Baltics through Russian lenses. They are thus likely to be receptive to Putin’s geopolitical gaming.
It’s unclear how Russians in Estonia would react to more aggressive overtures from Russia. But for now, they appear to tread cautiously, keeping unpopular opinions to themselves. There’s only a very small Russian minority political party, which isn’t even in the national parliament. Most Russian Estonians who can vote tend to cast their ballots for the Center Party, which includes ethnic Estonians.
Despite tensions, there are bright spots. Younger Russian speakers are much better integrated than their parents’ generation. Many, for example, speak flawless Estonian and hold good jobs. Most Russian speakers, even if they lost their privileged status of the Soviet era, have a far higher quality of living in prosperous, high-tech Estonia than their compatriots in Russia.
But Estonians are disinclined to rue their treatment of the Russians. Most say the approach in the early 1990s was and remains the right one. There has been no reconciliation that could help the population bridge the gap on contested issues. Andrei Hvostov, a social democratic politician who is the child of a mixed Estonian-Russian marriage, told me it would be a political suicide to even broach the possibility of reconciliation in public.
So now the fight over integration (or assimilation, as the Russians say) is a matter of geopolitical importance. It would be easy enough for Moscow to ratchet up the propaganda against Tallinn and Riga and start introducing rumors that fuel suspicions about ethnic Russians’ safety in these countries. Many observers here say it has already begun. For example, there is talk of forming a new Russian minority party that would defend the rights of Russian speakers.