Inclusion criteria stipulated that studies had to concern refugee children specifically, be conducted in Western countries and be of a non-clinical nature. Limitations were set for a 5-year period and a high level of reporting quality.
The term refugee is operationalized here as being any person who has made a claim for asylum under the Geneva Convention. The claim for asylum may be considered a process of self-referral; the children posit their own experience of some form of traumatic event and fall within our theoretical framework concerning the cumulative stress of forced migration. The requirement that the claim for asylum is made is to provide a clarification concerning the term refugee, which is a bureaucratic marker for managing migration (Zetter 2007). For the purposes of this review, it helps in disaggregating one of several populations that may be considered child forced migrants.
Western countries are defined as members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)—Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Hungary, Republic of Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, and the United States. These countries are signatories of both the Geneva Convention and the UN Convention for the Rights of the Child (UNCRC).
Children are defined as young people under the age of 25. While the UNCRC stipulates a cutoff of 18 years of age to differentiate childhood from adulthood, this may not practically be the case (Hart 2008). For the purposes of this review, therefore, the definition used for child is set to include all young people aged under 25, reflecting the age limit for state support of young people in the UK Care System (Great Britain 2008). This age limit also provides greater sensitivity to the search.
Study limits were placed on a 5-year period from 2003 to 2008 in order to reflect contemporaneous contextual situations for asylum-seekers and refugees in receiving countries and countries of origin. Arguably, this is important for several key reasons. Chiefly, the two meta-analyses described above ceased their searches at the end of 2002 (Porter and Haslam 2005; Fazel et al. 2005). In another paper (Lustig et al. 2004) also provide a comprehensive review up to 2002. As such, the reviewers wished to avoid duplication of work. Arguably, the populations found in more recent studies will reflect current conflict situations and perhaps be more directly applicable (e.g., Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia). Also, Western laws concerning asylum and immigration undergo frequent changes; for example, in the United Kingdom, there have been four major pieces of legislation relating to asylum-seekers between 2003 and 2008. Similar examples of changes in other countries may be found on the European Web site on Integration (European Commission 2010).
Only non-clinical samples were included in order to identify prevalence rates. Clinical samples could potentially bias results and lead to an overestimation of mental health problems.
Reporting quality was judged by applying the guidelines set by the STROBE initiative (von Elm et al. 2007). STROBE aims to increase the reporting of complete methods and results in observational studies; it aims to improve the quality of research. For a detailed description, see http://www.strobe-statement.org/ (STROBE Statement 2008). The Strobe Statement Web site provides a detailed checklist, which was used for the assessment of research in this review. Only studies meeting these criteria were included, meaning that sufficient information concerning the headline items on the STROBE Checklist of items that should be included in reports of cross-sectional studies were considered. Applying STROBE criteria was a mechanism for ensuring a high quality of research in this review.