With a place in the quarter-finals of Euro 2016 at stake, home nations Wales and Northern Ireland go head-to-head at Parc des Princes on Saturday.
All eyes will be on Gareth Bale, who is expected to star for the Welsh, but Steven Davis and Co will be no pushovers having surprised many by advancing to the last-16 stage.
Here, Sportsmail provides you with an everything you need to know guide going into the contest.
Gareth Bale has been a star performer for Wales and will be hoping to fire his side into Euro 2016 quarter-finals
A petition for a major football club to be established in the French capital drew 20,000 signatures and led to Paris Saint-Germain being founded in 1970.
Two years later their Parc des Princes home opened - the third stadium to have been built on the site.
Located in the south-west of Paris, Parc des Princes means 'Park of the Princes' and is home to the Ligue 1 champions, with a capacity of 48,712.
A general view of Parc des Princes, which is home to French giants PSG and will host Saturday's meeting
WHERE CAN I WATCH IT ON TV?
The game will be shown on BBC One at 4.10pm with kick-off scheduled for 5pm.
With a fully-fit squad to choose from, Chris Coleman has to make a decision between Sam Vokes, Jonny Williams and Hal Robson-Kanu - one of whom will partner Gareth Bale up front.
All three players started a game each in the group stage, with Vokes playing an impressive role in their stunning 3-0 victory over Russia.
Sam Vokes, Jonny Williams and Hal Robson-Kanu are competing to partner Gareth Bale (centre) up front
Michael O'Neill also has a full-fit squad to choose from and could pick the same team for Saturday's match that played against both Ukraine and German.
Conor Washington has been the lone striker in those matches, with Kyle Lafferty dropped to the bench, and the Queens Park Rangers striker could continue his run in the side.
Conor Washington, who started against Ukraine and Germany, is expected to continue his run in the team
Northern Ireland have won none of their last eight games against Wales (D4 L4). Their last victory dates back to May 1980 (1-0 in Cardiff, goal by Noel Brotherston).
It's the first encounter between two British teams in the knockout stages of a major tournament.
Wales have lost only two of their eight games at major tournaments, both by a one-goal difference - against Brazil in 1958 (0-1) and England in 2016 (1-2).
Injury time included, Wales have trailed for only two minutes and 31 seconds in total over their first three games at Euro 2016.
This is the first time Northern Ireland have made it to the knockout stages of a major tournament since the 1958 World Cup, where they were eliminated by France in the quarter-finals.
Northern Ireland did also make it out of the first round of group stages in the 1982 World Cup by finishing top but they then failed to make it out of a second round of group stages.
Northern Ireland have only lost two of their last 15 internationals (W7 D6). However, these two defeats have come in their last three games (vs Poland and Germany at EURO 2016).
Gareth Bale became the first player to score in all three group games at Euro finals since Milan Baros and Ruud van Nistelrooy did it in 2004.