A popular summer attraction: Slide Rock State Park in Oak Creek Canyon, Sedona, Arizona.
Escape the summer heat in one of northern Arizona’s oldest and most spectacular swimming holes — Slide Rock on Oak Creek in Sedona. A long-time favorite with the locals (from Flagstaff to the Verde Valley and beyond), the elongated champagne chute, glassy green pools and red rock beaches offer the perfect place to relax, enjoy nature, and break away from the mundane.
This waterslide was created by Mother Nature without all the chemicals and chlorine – just the spectacular red rock views within the venerable Oak Creek Canyon.
Cascade along the gently sloping and slippery creek bottom buoyed by a thousand bubbles, or plunge into the crystalline depths of one of the larger pools.
Click images to view slide show:
Or just sit alongside the creek dangling your feet into the clear, cool water watching the myriad birds that share this idyllic wonderland.
The recreational area is part of Slide Rock State Park. Bring along a picnic lunch – and fishing gear for those so inclined (no glass bait jars please.)
The Park is located on the historic 43 acre Pendley Homestead that included an apple orchard and the now famous slick rock slide right next door. (Imagine the fun those Pendley kids had every summer day after chores!)
While most notably famous for the smooth chute down Oak Creek, Slide Rock State Park is one of the few original homesteads in Oak Creek Canyon and the surrounding area that remains intact.
The water quality is tested daily and is reported through the Water Quality Hotline by calling 602-542-0202. Slide Rock is open from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily; the Park closes at 7 p.m. Plan to arrive early as parking is limited. There is per vehicle fee with up to four adults and/or children 12 years and older. A fee is charged for each additional adult, and children under 12 yearbvs are admitted free.
And about that apple orchard. Be sure to put the 4th Annual Slide Rock Apple Festival on your calendar, held each September. The family-oriented event will feature farm fresh apples for sale, a variety of kids activities including face painting, pumpkin decorating and a hay stack maze, games of corn hole for the adults, and interpretative talks including one with a descendant of the original homesteaders, Cathy Pendley.
Slide Rock State Park is located seven miles north of Sedona and 20 miles down the scenic Oak Creek Canyon from Flagstaff.
Park amenities include nature and hiking trails, a volleyball court and a small market for picnic supplies. For additional information, visitors are encouraged to call ahead. Visit www.pr.state.az.us or call 928-282-3034.
Article by Terree Duncan. Photos by Terree L. Duncan and Al Comello.Information about Slide Rock State Park courtesy of Arizona State Parks.