France's reluctance to yield to David Cameron's demands for a tailor-made repatriation of powers will depend on the subtlety of his political manoeuvring
When it comes to dealing with Europe, the most pragmatic politicians are not always those who present themselves as such. As the public debate on the position of Britain in the EU gains momentum before May's general election, the strategy adopted by David Cameron is still met with circumspection in Paris. A sort of double reading tends to emerge when looking at the British government's approach, much of which depends on how ‘ideological’ the British prime minister might become to appeal to voters.
As any other EU country, France longs for a simpler EU that would legislate less but more effectively, scrap red tape and focus on a limited number of core issues. France's leftwing president François Hollande, who has always asserted himself as pro-European, now admits that the EU “is struggling with its institutions and its complex rules”. But this widely shared view beyond borders falls short of finding a common agenda. Calling for more ‘simplification’ may actually sow confusion between France and Britain – as much as the word ‘growth’ prompts misunderstanding between France and Germany.
Two years after Cameron's comprehensive speech on the future of Europe, the two countries still have different perspectives on the cause of the so-called EU inefficiency and the solutions needed to overcome it. After all, the excessive bureaucracy in Brussels might also have been caused by British inspired reform: the initiative promoted by Neil Kinnock in the early 2000s to revamp the European commission stirred deep frustration in Paris. The necessity to fight against the mismanagement of EU money after the fall of the Santer commission is said to have paved the way to a Kafkian system of reporting, due to the growing complexity of procedures to present valid invoices to obtain EU funds. This rigid approach spurred anti-Brussels feelings among stakeholders who were initially fervent Europhiles (researchers, companies, local authorities). But the main controversy regarding Cameron's bid to reform the EU lies elsewhere.
Ahead of the European council in October 2013, Paris and London worked on simplification but finally failed to present a common initiative. While France insisted on improving the methodological aspects, such as EU commission's often poor impact assessments, Britain stuck to a list of claims submitted by private companies in a report titled: Cut EU red tape. The document called for the withdrawal of a series of texts centred mainly on the environment, social policy and food regulation – areas that resonate as cherished issues for center-left leaders. In Paris, simplification and deregulation are not equal.. If France might be ready to start a debate on certain legislation, it rules out the launch of a risky cherry-picking process, in case the British initiative should open a Pandora’s box with 28 member states frenetically submitting their own wishes.
The extent to which the French are willing to act cooperatively will basically depend on how far Cameron wants to push his reform agenda. If his ambitions require a right to veto financial legislation or a treaty change to alter the free movement of EU workers and wipe off certain EU competences, Paris will certainly not compromise. Even if this treaty change were to be traded against a deep reinforcement of the eurozone's governance and financial tools. The political appetence for an umpteenth debate on Brussels institutions has never been so low in France. The citizens' huge disillusionment with the EU project would possibly give victory to the no advocates and spark further turmoil. As a senior French diplomat commented: "A rejection by the French of a text presented as paramount for the survival of the euro would spread fire everywhere. It would be like playing with the markets, and at the end, playing with real life."
There is a need to come to a tricky compromise so that Cameron could obtain something seen as firmly credible in Britain, while remaining relatively soft for France. The speech on immigration delivered in November 2014 by the prime minister offers a good example. Extremely stern in the expression, promising "to create the toughest system in the EU for dealing with abuse of free movement", Cameron has not explicitly mentioned the idea to introduce quotas of EU migrants to limit the number of jobs occupied by non-nationals in Britain. Nor did he bring up the project of a ‘safeguard clause’ to prevent EU citizens from settling in case of an influx of migrants. Delicate manoeuvring of this nature may be crucial over the coming months, as the future of the EU is decided.
Marie Herbet is a journalist at the French public policy journal Contexte