The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) advise against all travel to:
Events in Ukraine are fast moving. You should monitor this travel advice regularly, subscribe to email alerts and read our advice on how to deal with a crisis overseas.
The Ukraine authorities expect protests from 15 to 24 November 2016 in several locations in central Kyiv. Ukrainian police have reported that Khreschatyk street will be closed to traffic from 15 November 2016 and other streets may close. You should avoid demonstrations and public gatherings and regularly check the travel advice for Ukraine and local media for updates. See Safety and Security.
The FCO isn’t able to provide consular services to anyone in the parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts not currently under control of the Ukrainian authorities.
The security situation in the southeastern parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts of Ukraine remains highly unstable with ongoing clashes between Ukrainian armed forces and Russian-backed armed separatists. This has resulted in more than 9,500 deaths and the displacement of over 1.5 million people. Civilians continue to get caught up in the fighting.
It’s illegal under Ukrainian law to enter internationally recognised Ukrainian territory through a border point that isn’t currently controlled by the Ukrainian authorities. If you do so, you risk arrest or a fine, and you may be subject to a travel ban.  International border crossings that aren’t currently under the control of the Ukrainian authorities include all land border crossings into Donetsk Oblast and many or the land border crossings into Luhansk Oblast.  A list of open border crossings is available at the State Border Crossing Service of Ukraine
There are no scheduled flights into or out of Donetsk and Luhansk airport.
The FCO is not able to provide consular services to anyone in Crimea.
Russian forces and pro-Russian groups have established full operational control in Crimea. Following an illegal referendum on 16 March 2014, Russia illegally annexed Crimea on 21 March 2014 and tensions remain high.
Ukrainian International Airlines have cancelled all flights to and from Simferopol.
All train and official bus services to Crimea have been cancelled.
It’s illegal under Ukrainian law to enter internationally recognised Ukrainian territory through a border point that isn’t currently controlled by the Ukrainian authorities. If you do so, you risk arrest or a fine, and you may be subject to a travel ban.  International border points that aren’t currently under the control of the Ukrainian authorities include all air and sea ports in Crimea.  A list of open border crossings is available at the State Border Crossing Service of Ukraine.  To enter or exit Crimea, foreign nationals will need to provide their passport and a special permit issued by the State Migration Service of Ukraine.
The Crimean sea ports of Kerch, Sevastopol, Feodosia, Yalta and Yevpatoria have been designated by the Ukrainian authorities as closed to international shipping.
The situation in Kyiv and western cities is generally calm, although occasional public demonstrations take place in and around the Verkhovna Rada (parliament building) and elsewhere in Kyiv. You should remain vigilant and monitor the media for information about possible safety or security risks. Public demonstrations can flare up and turn violent with little warning. From 15 to 24 November 2016 crowds are expected by the Ukrainian authorities to gather for protests in central Kyiv and there may be road closures.
There has also been a series of small explosions, mainly in the middle of the night, and other security incidents in Kyiv, Kharkiv, Odesa, Kherson and Lviv. These have included bombs being placed in pubs and cafes and outside banks. There have also been hoax bomb threats, especially in Kyiv.
On 20 July, a car exploded in the centre of Kyiv resulting in the death of the driver, prominent journalist Pavel Sheremet. No other individuals were harmed and Ukraine’s security services are investigating.
You should take great care and remain vigilant throughout Ukraine. Avoid all demonstrations and take extra care in public gatherings.
The British Embassy in Kyiv is open to the public by appointment only. If you need to contact the British Embassy, please call +380 44 490 3660, or send an email to ukembinf@gmail.com
Around 55,000 British nationals visited Ukraine in 2015. Most visits are trouble-free.
Take care on the roads. There are a high number of traffic accidents, including fatalities. See Road travel
Beware of petty crime, especially in crowded areas and tourist spots or when using public transport. See Crime
There is a general threat from terrorism. See Terrorism
The Overseas Business Risk service offers information and advice for British companies operating overseas on how to manage political, economic, and business security-related risks.
Take out comprehensive travel and medical insurance before you travel.