As the terrorist attacks unfolded in Paris tonight, many US presidential candidates took to social media to express their condolences and offer prayers to the victims, their families, and their city.
The reports from Paris are harrowing. Praying for the city and families of the victims. -H
My prayers are with the victims and hostages in the horrible Paris attacks. May God be with you all.
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 13, 2015
While Trump kept politics out of his statement today, a tweet of his from January about gun control—a reaction to the attack on the French magazine Charlie Hebdo—made the rounds again on Twitter.
Isn’t it interesting that the tragedy in Paris took place in one of the toughest gun control countries in the world?
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 7, 2015
Bernie Sanders went on Facebook to say: “We are all horrified by the cowardly attacks against innocent civilians in Paris. I offer my sympathy to the victims and their families. We stand in solidarity with the people of France, the first friend of the United States.”
Lindsey Graham’s remarks echo those of president Barack Obama, who called the events an attack “not just on Paris, not just on the people of France” but “on all of humanity and the universal values we share.”
This isn't just an attack on the French people, it's an attack on human decency & all things that we hold dear.
My heart breaks for the families of those killed, the hostages, & injured.
There's a sickness in the world that has to be dealt with & we must come together to confront it. America should lead that unity.
Horrific reports coming out of Paris. Our thoughts and prayers are with all the people of France — our oldest ally. https://t.co/701TBDfwQB
Praying for Paris tonight. America will stand with you against terror.
My thoughts and prayers are with the people in Paris tonight.
— Dr. Ben Carson (@RealBenCarson) November 13, 2015
Tonight we pray for and mourn with our French brothers and sisters. Today's horror is another reminder that we must be vigilant against evil
My prayers are with the people of Paris, France. America will always have your back in the war against terrorism. Always.
— Gov. Mike Huckabee (@GovMikeHuckabee) November 13, 2015
Our thoughts are with the people of France. Please say a prayer for Paris as they deal with this horrible attack.
— Gov. Bobby Jindal (@BobbyJindal) November 13, 2015
Coordinated attacks ongoing in Paris are horrifying.  We pray for a swift resolution.
— George E. Pataki (@GovernorPataki) November 13, 2015
My thoughts & prayers are with the people of Paris.  America must stand united with France as they face this truly horrific act of terrorism
— Dr. Rand Paul (@RandPaul) November 13, 2015
Praying for victims of attacks in Paris and for those reportedly held hostage.
Our prayers go out for the people of Paris tonight. -John
Heartbreaking news from Paris. Praying for the country and its people. -O'M
Not all the candidates have weighed in publicly. Carly Fiorina and Chris Christie have not yet issued public statements via Twitter, Facebook, or their websites.