Natural wonders! Many people come to Arizona to check out the Grand Canyon, and it's easy to see why. If you hike into the canyon, there are beautiful waterfalls with small, sandy beaches attached. Arizona also features tons of forests, especially up north. If you want to hike or simply see snow in the winter, head to Kaibab National Forest or Apache Sitgreaves National Forest.
When you move to the southwest, you'll notice that it's easy to find newer real estate and even brand new homes. The average age of houses here is about 24 years, compared to the average of 37 years for most homes in the US. If you want a new build, check Arizona home listings in newer cities like Maricopa and Queen Creek.
Amazing shopping! One of the most popular activities here is shopping, since there are great indoor malls and outdoor shopping centers alike. Scottsdale Fashion Square is filled with stores that sell designer clothing, while Tempe Marketplace is an outdoor center that has dozens of stores, eateries and even a venue for live musical performances.
The Wild West! It's easy to appreciate the cowboy lifestyle in this state, thanks to a few fun attractions. Rawhide Western Town and Steakhouse in Phoenix features gold panning, a replica stagecoach, a petting zoo, a mechanical bull and live shows starring cowboys. Head farther south to the Tucson area and you'll be in Tombstone, a tiny Western town with historic buildings like the Bird Cage Theatre and the O.K. Corral.
Refreshing lakes! In this state, you'll want to go swimming or boating in the summer in order to cool off. That's easy when you live near popular bodies of water like Lake Havasu, which is a well-known spring break destination. Many Arizonans also enjoy heading to Lake Pleasant, which is north of Phoenix, or Saguaro Lake to the east. This lake connects to the equally popular Salt River, which is perfect for tubing in the summer.
Historic sites! Arizona has several amazing artifacts and structures preserved from Native American tribes that lived here hundreds of years ago. Camp Verde's Montezuma Castle, for example, is a cliff dwelling from the 12th century. Other cliff dwellings can be found at the Canyon de Chelly National Monument, which has been around since the year 350.
Plenty of vacancies! Whether you want to buy or rent a home in Arizona, it shouldn't take you long to find a great property. That's because the vacancy rate is about 17%, which is higher than average. Cities like Buckeye and Anthem have plenty of homes for you to choose from. Be sure to check our Arizona home listings!
Golf courses! You can golf in practically any city in Arizona. Some of the best-rated courses are Scottsdale's Troon North, Carefree's Boulders Golf Club and Maricopa's Ak-Chin Southern Dunes Golf Club.