Holidays to Lake Bled have captured the hearts and minds of visitors for centuries. With its pristine alpine landscapes and medieval castle, the magical atmosphere ensures a truly unique Slovenia holiday, whichever time of year you visit.
As a popular holiday destination since the late nineteenth century, Lake Bled is a beautiful place to go skiing, and the resort is largely geared towards inexperienced skiers and intermediates. Lake Bled's main ski areas of Kobla and Vogel are situated in the beautiful Bohinj Valley, only a scenic 40-minute bus ride away from the town. Embracing a family-friendly policy and open to visitors throughout the year, Lake Bled has a series of open nursery slopes for children and inexperienced adults. Children as young as five can learn at the ski schools, and the inexperienced skier will find tuition, rental and lift ticket packages, perfect for family ski holidays in Lake Bled. However, experienced skiers should not be put off, as the resort has a series of more advanced runs to keep professionals happy!
Skiing in Lake Bled covers five main areas; Straza, Pokljuka, Zartnic, Vogel and Kobla, with a combined terrain of 88km served by 22 lifts. Locals generally start skiing in Straza, which a modern resort with a peak of 600m, and is relatively close to the town centre of Bled. Skiing here is limited to ski school residents but they do remain open in the evenings for anyone wanting a late night race down the slopes!
Holidays in Lake Bled also provide access to the ski areas in nearby Slovenian villages, which include the legendary Kranjska Gora and Lake Bohinj. More adventurous skiers may travel an extra ten kilometres away to Zatrnik, which has a total of 16km of trails, and is again suited to beginners and intermediate skiers.
Slovenia is a landlocked nation and only has one island, which can be found in the centre of Lake Bled. Capturing the picturesque charm of the resort, the Church of St Mary captivates visitors with its postcard qualities. European aristocrats have been enjoying the idyllic wonders of Bled for centuries now, and, situated on the edge of the Triglav National Park and only 22 miles away from the Slovenian capital Ljubliana, Lake Bled is in a perfect location for visitors in search of a relaxing break.
With an emphasis on beginners and children, Lake Bled remains a perfect location for a family ski holiday to Slovenia. With its gorgeous scenery, friendly atmosphere and versatile range of slopes, Lake Bled is an ideal setting for a winter break. Book with easyJet holidays today and save money by booking your flights and hotels together, so you can just start planning that perfect holiday!