During World Antibiotic Awareness Week (14-20 November) ReAct arranges a series of exciting activities. These include policy meetings, hospital visits with sessions on antimicrobial resistance, seminars, media conferences, workshops, launch of child education materials, forums, presentations, TV and radio shows and much more. Countries covered by these activities are Kenya, Zimbabwe, Uganda, Indonesia, Thailand and Ecuador.
In the last 70 years the use of antibiotics has been crucial in improving countless lives and drastically reducing deaths caused by bacterial infections. The increasing development of antibiotic resistance is posing a serious threat to human health and development, the environment and for animal health. Learn more about ReAct’s work on antibiotic resistance here.
Articles in national newspapers, quiz for students, televisions shows, hospital visits, stickers on public vehicles and getting the new Antimicrobial Policy receive government accent are some of ReAct Africa’s activities during World Antibiotic Awareness week.
The Child to Child Stories are launched during the World Antibiotic Awareness Week in Venzuela, Argentina and Ecuador.
Coordinating action on antimicrobial resistance globally – what are the next steps for the UN Inter-Agency Coordination Group?
Mindboggling costs published last week by the Swedish Public Health Authority show the magnitude of future financial consequences of antibiotics resistance.
The ReAct Toolbox is a user-friendly web-based resource that provides inspiration and guidance to take action and develop national action plans on antibiotic resistance. It is built on what has been done in the past in a variety of settings, and is aligned with ongoing and current initiatives from across the globe.
ReAct is a global network of antibiotic resistance experts with nodes in Africa, Asia Pacific, Europe, Latin America and North America.
Get our newsletter twice a month to be updated on the latest research, policy news, ReAct global network activities and much more.
 Past newsletters
Involved in developing your country's National Action Plan? Here you find support for developing a comprehensive plan.
Doctors, nurses, veterinarians and other health care professionals - you have the power to take action! Learn more about how to get started.
Engagement from civil society organizations and communities is needed to tackle antibiotic resistance. Learn more about how to get involved.
Stay on top of the latest news in antibiotic resistance:
Sign up to our Newsletter
on Facebook
on Twitter
ReAct is funded by SIDA, Uppsala University and others. Information on the site is for educational purposes only. The site uses cookies. Image credits.