Sweden's Social Democrat prime minister Stefan Löfven called Peres a "legendary leader". In a written statement to news agency TT, Löfven said: "With the death of Shimon Peres, Israel has lost a legendary leader and the world has lost a champion for peace." His office also posted a message on Twitter.
With the passing of Shimon Peres Israel has lost a legendary leader and the world has lost a champion for peace.
Foreign Minister Margot Wallström, whose relations with Israel have been strained ever since her government recognised Palestine as a state, wrote on Twitter: "Israel has lost a major statesman. I offer my deepest condolences to Shimon Peres' family and the people of Israel."
Israel has lost a major statesman. I offer my deepest condolences to Shimon Peres' family and the people of Israel.
Sweden’s former foreign minister, Carl Bildt, also took to social media to honour the Israeli veteran politician, tweeting: "Shimon Peres was a man of brave vision and deep wisdom. Israel at its very best. And what it ought to be. Will be deeply missed."
Shimon Peres was a man of brave vision and deep wisdom. Israel at its very best. And what it ought to be. Will be deeply missed.
The leader of the opposition Moderate Party, Anna Kinberg Batra, who recently visited Israel, tweeted: "Sad news about the death of former Israeli president and PM Shimon Peres. His belief in and work for peace will live on."
Sad news about the death of former Israeli president and PM Shimon Peres. His belief in and work for peace will live on.
Peres and then Israeli prime minister Yitzak Rabin worked along with the late Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and with US president Bill Clinton to bring about the 1993 Israeli-Palestinian Oslo Peace Accords, for which Peres won the 1994 Nobel Peace Prize, along with Arafat and Rabin.
Peres suffered a massive stroke two weeks ago. He was reported to be making progress, but doctors said he took a turn for the worse Tuesday. The Sheba Medical Centre in Tel Aviv announced Peres' death at 3.40 am Wednesday morning, according to the official government Israel New Agency.
US president Barack Obama, Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau, and Bill and Hillary Clinton are among the world leaders who will attend the funeral of the former Israeli president on Friday.