Jannu Kuusik  is enrolled in a master
degree program at the Universiy of  Tartu Faculty of  Law and works  in Tallinn
City Government as a legal adviser.  Kart Miil is a  librarian at Tartu 
University  Library.
The first
traces of human settlement on the territory of today’s Estonia date back to
more than 10,000 years ago when these areas were inhabited by Finno-Ugric
tribes. Modern-day Estonians can be said to be the descendants of those tribes,
with the concession that throughout history Estonians have blended with various
other nationalities that came to these areas as conquerors. The ancient
Estonians retained their independence until the beginning of the 13th century
when Estonian areas were conquered by Germans. From the 13th to the beginning
of the 20th century, Estonian territory was ruled by different foreign
invaders, including German, Swedish, Danish, Polish, and Russian. Development
of Estonian law has been most affected by the German legal order. As
development of continental European law at that time was itself most influenced
by ancient Rome, the roots of Estonian law can also be found there. Instruction
about Roman law forms an integral part of training today’s lawyers.
The modern Estonian state was founded on 24 February 1918
when Estonia declared its independence and sovereign statehood. Unfortunately,
the first period of independence remained short, because the ambitions of different
world powers at the beginning of the 20th century brought Estonia under
occupation by the Soviet Union in 1940. Estonia regained its independence as a
result of disintegration of the Soviet Union. Estonia declared its independence
for the second time on 20 August 1991, which also marked the end of fifty years
of Soviet occupation.
The keywords of Estonia’s development after regaining
independence have been openness, liberalism, and international cooperation. In
a relatively short period, the state-building process was completed and
European values were reaffirmed. Estonia’s openness has guaranteed rapid
economic development and the social welfare of its people. The success and
openness of the economy is also attested by the fact of Estonia’s continuing high-level
global ranking by its index of economic freedom. As a small country, Estonia
has well understood the importance of international cooperation and the meaning
of globalization. These processes are inevitable in today’s society, so that
there is no sense in fighting them but, rather, trying to make best use of them.
Estonia is now a member of a number of major international organizations, most
important among these being the European Union, NATO, and the Schengen visa area.
Estonia has proved to its partners that despite its smallness, it is a serious
and reliable partner that respects democratic values. The most important
feature of today’s legal system in Estonia stems from the fact of its membership
of the European Union since 2004 so that EU law forms an integral part of
Estonian law.
Estonia is a parliamentary republic with the supreme power
of the state vested in the people. Legislative power lies with the parliament (Riigikogu).
The parliament consists of 101 members, elected by Estonian citizens for a term
of four years. Executive power lies with the Government of the Republic, which
implements the country’s domestic and foreign policy and organizes
implementation of legislation. The Government consists of 14 ministers, headed
by the Prime Minister, and operates through eleven ministries. The head of
state is the President. The President plays a primarily representative role,
though also serving as supreme commander of national defence forces. Issues of
local life are managed by local authorities, divided into rural and urban
municipalities. The local government representative body is the council,
elected for a term of four years. Unlike in parliamentary elections,
non-citizens who have permanently resided in their local community for at least
five years may also participate in local government elections. Local authorities
are independent bodies of executive power and interference by the central government
in local issues is minimal. County authorities serve as a link between central
and local government. The main role of county authorities is to coordinate and
monitor performance of state functions at local level.
In summary, Estonia characterizes a democratic parliamentary
republic observing the classic principle of separation and balance of powers in
the shape of legislative, executive, and judicial power with mechanisms for
ensuring balance of power.
According to the classic approach, the Estonian legal
system belongs to the continental European legal tradition, the Roman-Germanic
family, and follows the classic division into private, public, and criminal
law. Significantly, however, Estonian law today is increasingly influenced by other
legal systems, in common with the legal systems of other developed countries.
Various principles contribute to the development of law, each legal system
borrowing from the other. Additionally, generally recognized principles of
international law and binding international treaties form an inseparable part
of Estonian law. Judicial precedent, too, serves as an important source of law
in Estonia today. Case law of the Supreme Court is decisive with regard to
issues of interpretation of law or when gaps in legislation need to be bridged.
Today’s globalised society is rapidly developing so that the somewhat
cumbersome legislative process is not always able to react to necessary
changes. However, as appropriate for a system governed by rule of law, legal
gaps should not exist. The Supreme Court has the authority to interpret legal
rules and its opinions are taken into account when dealing with similar
situations in the future. Reflection of rapid changes and shifting values in
society in court judgments also conforms to the spirit of the law. Note, however,
that the Estonian legal system is formally norm-based, not a mixed system of
precedent and statutory law. Interpretation of norms is necessary to allow the
legal system to keep pace with a rapidly changing modern society.
The classical distinction between private and public law
is somewhat difficult nowadays. Estonia wishes to attend to the welfare of all
members of society. In the process of law-making, this also implies attempting
to ensure the rights and interests of the weaker party in legal relationships. Under
this principle, legal norms aimed at protecting the interests of the weaker
party are usually imperative, so that agreements entered into in contravention
of these principles are void. Norms aimed at protecting the public interest
increasingly often find their way into private law. At the same time, an
opposite trend also exists, with more and more private law principles emerging
in public law. This occurs mainly in areas regulating relations between the
state and individuals (both natural and legal persons), as such relations
should be based on an equal footing, excluding the possibility of abuse of
power.
The current Estonian Constitution was adopted by a
referendum held on 28 June 1992. The Constitution stipulates that Estonia is a
sovereign democratic republic where the supreme power of the state is vested in
the people. The Constitution also includes the principle of a state based on
social justice, according to which the state must ensure basic social
guarantees such as education, medical assistance, and minimum income. The
independence and sovereignty of Estonia are timeless and inalienable. State
authority is exercised solely under the Constitution and laws that conform to
it. The Constitution also states that generally recognised principles and rules
of international law are an inseparable part of the Estonian legal system.
The key principles enshrined in the Constitution include
the following: the principle of separation of powers; protection of the rights
and freedoms of all people, restricted only in accordance with the
Constitution; the principle of legality and equal treatment; prohibition of
discrimination; the right to state protection for ensuring compliance with the
rights of individuals; the right of recourse to a court of law; freedom of
speech and assembly; integrity of the person; the presumption of innocence;
inviolability of family life and privacy; protection of national minorities;
freedom of enterprise; protection of health; protection of property; freedom of
choice of occupation; and other important principles characteristic of a
country governed by rule of law.
As the parliament, the Riigikogu is the highest
legislative body and consists of 101 deputies elected by popular vote. Riigikogu
elections are held every four years and only adult Estonian citizens can
participate in elections. Election results are determined on the basis of the
principle of proportionality.
Estonia has six seats in the European Parliament. Members
of the European Parliament are elected by popular vote according to the principle
of proportionality for a term of five years.
An Estonian citizen by birth of at least forty years of
age may be nominated as a candidate for President of the Republic. The
President is elected for a term of five years. No one can be elected President
for more than two consecutive terms. The right to nominate a candidate for
President rests with not less than one-fifth of the members of the Riigikogu.
Under § 79 of the Constitution, the Riigikogu elects the President
by secret ballot. A candidate approved by the votes of a two-thirds majority of
the members of the Riigikogu is considered elected. If the Riigikogu
fails to elect a President of the Republic, the president of the Riigikogu
convenes an electoral body for election of the President of the Republic within
one month. The electoral body consists of members of the Riigikogu and
representatives of local government councils.
Assumption of office by the President of the Republic
terminates his or her authority and duties in all elected and appointed
offices, and he or she must suspend membership in political parties for the
duration of the term of office as President. The competencies of President as
Head of State are listed in § 78 of the Constitution and specified by the President
of the Republic Rules of Procedure Act and other special laws.
The President of Estonia fulfils a mainly ceremonial
function. By tradition, the President pays great attention to international
relations and communication. The first President of Estonia was Konstantin
Päts, while the first President of re-independent Estonia was Lennart Meri, who
was elected for two consecutive terms and thanks to whom Estonia gained wide
recognition abroad. The President also proposes to the Riigikogu candidates
for appointment to various high-level government offices and, following
approval of the Riigikogu, appoints them to office. Formally, the
President is also head of the Estonian Defence Forces.
The Government of the Republic is the executive power body
in Estonia. Traditionally, the President of the Republic invites the leader of
the political party that gained most votes in elections to form a Government.
The Government is formed following negotiations between the political parties represented
in the Riigikogu. The political parties that form the Government
establish a coalition. This begins implementing policies agreed in a coalition
agreement and party election promises. The Government includes 14 ministers,
with the Prime minister as Head of Government.
The State Chancellery is a government agency within the
Government of the Republic. The State Chancellery supports the Government and
the Prime Minister in policy development and implementation; provides support to
ministers without portfolio; promotes public service; develops document
management and archiving; organises publication of the State Gazette; and
manages issues relating to symbols and decorations.
Government agencies include various executive agencies and
inspectorates acting within their competencies under the area of administration
of different ministries, as well as other institutions that exercise executive
power within their area of administration.
The National
Audit Office supervises public sector agencies and institutions. Its main focus
is on assessing practicality and efficiency. The National Audit Office is an
audit body acting in the interests of and paid for by the taxpayer. Its tasks
include investigation of how state and local government spent taxpayers’ money
and what they gave in return. Results of the work of the National Audit Office
are intended primarily for the Riigikogu, the Government, and the
public. The National Audit Office is not competent to punish anybody, and it
does not exercise power of its own but assists decision-makers in an advisory capacity.
In order to enable the Riigikogu and the Government to spend public
money more efficiently and to govern more effectively, the National Audit
Office carries out two types of audit: (1) financial audit, and (2) performance
audit.
The local
government system consists of rural municipality and city authorities. Local authorities
act on the basis of the principle of local autonomy so that they are
independent in exercising power and managing local issues within their
administrative territory. Local administrations are formed as a result of local
council elections. Elections take place every four years. Adult Estonian
citizens can vote in elections. Unlike in the Riigikogu elections,
non-citizens who have lived in the territory of the corresponding local authority
for at least five years also have the right to vote in local council elections.
Election results lead to formation of local government councils, which are
competent to decide main local issues and develop local policy. Daily issues
are managed by the rural municipality administration or city administration. Local
government mayors representing rural municipalities or cities are appointed by
the local council. Other posts within a rural municipality or city administration
are non-political.
Estonia has fifteen counties. Counties are run by county authorities
which serve primarily as a link between central and local government. The main
task of the county authority is to perform state functions at a local level. To
a limited extent, county governments also supervision the activities of rural
municipality and city administrations, first and foremost with regard to performance
of state functions.
The main
objective of the Bank of Estonia is to ensure price stability, achieved through
a stable exchange rate. Estonia applies the principles of the currency board
system in managing the exchange rate, under which the rate of the Estonian kroon
is pegged to the euro (1 euro = 15.6466 kroons). The Estonian kroon
is freely convertible, which means that no obstacles exist to free movement of
capital. Estonia has used the currency board system since 1992. The currency
board is an automatic system based on strict rules. To maintain the fixed
exchange rate of the Estonian kroon, the liabilities of the central bank,
including the monetary base in the economy, must be fully guaranteed by foreign
currency or gold reserves. In the currency board system, the central bank is
prohibited by law from granting credit to central or local government, either
directly or indirectly. According to the Security of the Estonian Kroon Act,
the Bank of Estonia may not devalue the exchange rate of the Estonian kroon.
In order
to ensure smooth operation of the currency board system, the central bank has
monetary policy instruments at its disposal. With the help of these
instruments, the bank tries to ensure the smooth functioning of the liquidity
system as well as the existence of sufficient buffers for coping with
unexpected situations. The main monetary policy instruments include the
permanent possibility of purchase and sale of foreign currency and the
requirement of a mandatory reserve for commercial banks. In compliance with the
currency board framework, the rate of the mandatory reserve is significantly
higher (currently 15% of the reserve) than in countries with different exchange
rate systems. As monetary policy instruments are limited in the case of a fixed
exchange rate system, the government’s budgetary policy plays an important part
in stabilising the Estonian economy. A conservative and balanced budgetary
policy is necessary to ensure sustainability of the economy. Flexibility of the
real sector, in particular the labour market, is an important prerequisite for
the smooth functioning of the currency board. In the case of a fixed exchange
rate, the economy cannot be balanced through changing the exchange rate. Thus,
economic growth must be adjusted on the side of the real economy – in
wages and prices.
The Financial
Supervision Authority is a financial supervisory agency with an autonomous
competence and budget which exercises supervision on behalf of the state and is
independent in its activities and decisions. The Financial Supervision
Authority carries out state supervision over banks, insurance companies,
insurance intermediaries, investment firms, management companies, and the
securities market. The objective of supervision is to protect the interests of
clients and investors in preserving their assets, thereby supporting the
credibility of the Estonian monetary system. The main aim of supervision is to
ensure that financial institutions are able to perform their obligations to
clients, e.g. to pay out bank deposits, insurance indemnities, and funded
pensions. The Financial Supervision Authority also aims to contribute to
increasing the effectiveness of the Estonian financial sector, reducing systemic
risks, and preventing fraudulent criminal use of the sector.
Securities
issued in Estonia are registered electronically in the central register. Practically
no circulation occurs of paper-based securities. The central register reflects
the turnover of securities and their owners.
The liberal
professions are highly qualified professions where the main activities are
performed personally (i.e. they cannot be delegated to paid assistants),
independently and on one’s own responsibility. The liberal professions are
characterised by preparatory service for entry into the profession, the
requirement to pass a professional examination, and the principle of self-sufficiency
(i.e. the state does not pay their wages). Some liberal professions exercise
state authority to the extent delegated to them.
Notaries
are holders of public office empowered by the state to attest, on request, to facts
and events with legal significance and to perform other notarial acts to ensure
legal certainty.
The professional activities of an
auditor include auditing, business consultancy, and other functions assigned to
auditors by legislation.
Those who
have passed the examination for trustees in bankruptcy and who have a
certificate issued by the evaluation committee can serve as trustees in
bankruptcy. The trustee ensures the legality of the bankruptcy process.
Bailiffs
are holders of public office whom the state has empowered to perform compulsory
execution of court judgments and other financial claims, in compliance with
applicable legislation.
members of the Estonian Bar Association have the right to provide legal
services as advocates. Higher requirements of ethics and education apply to
sworn advocates. An advocate’s certificate is issued to those who pass the
relevant examination to demonstrate knowledge of law.
Sworn translators are holders of public office empowered by the
state to certify, equally with notaries, the correctness of translations of
documents translated by themselves or by others.
Patent
agents provide legal
services in the field of industrial property. In cases prescribed by law, legal
services may be provided only by a patent agent.
institution of Chancellor of Justice was recreated in accordance with the principle
of continuity in the Constitution of 1992. Recreation of the institution of
Chancellor of Justice on the model of the 1938 constitution demonstrates the
importance of this institution in constitutional structure and legal culture. According
to the 1992 Constitution, the Chancellor of Justice is proposed by the
President of the Republic and appointed by the Riigikogu for a term of
seven years. The Chancellor of Justice, as an independent official, reviews
legislation of general application of the state legislature and executive and
of local government to verify its conformity with the Constitution and other
laws. Once a year, the Chancellor of Justice submits to the Riigikogu a
report with an overview of his or her activity. The Chancellor of Justice in
Estonia combines the function of a general body for petition and guardian of
constitutionality. This combined competence is unique internationally. Another
important constitutional task entrusted to the Chancellor of Justice is that of
ombudsman. Under this function, the Chancellor of Justice monitors whether
state agencies comply with fundamental rights and freedoms and with principles
of good governance. An amendment to the Chancellor of Justice Act that entered
into effect on 01 January 2004 further expanded the functions of the Chancellor
as an ombudsman – the Chancellor of Justice now also supervises local
government, legal persons in public law, and private persons who exercise
public functions. By exercising these closely related tasks, the Chancellor of
Justice focuses on review of compliance with fundamental constitutional values
– human dignity, democracy, rule of law, social justice. Whether a law or
regulation of the Government, a Minister, or local government conforms with the
Constitution can to a large extent be assessed on the basis of information that
the Chancellor of Justice obtains when verifying the guarantee of fundamental
rights.
According
to the Constitution, the Chancellor of Justice may participate in sessions of
the Riigikogu and of the Government with the right to speak. The
Chancellor of Justice receives copies of draft legislation submitted to the Riigikogu
and the Government for debate, as well as other materials which, by their
nature, require that the Chancellor should be informed about their various
stages of processing until adoption. In principle, through exercise of the
right to speak at sessions of the Government, the Chancellor of Justice performs
the function of preliminary control in respect of draft legislation.
Estonia
has a three-level court system. First instance courts are county courts. The
four county courts, in turn, are divided into regional courthouses. Second
instance courts are two courts of appeal, also divided into regional
courthouses. The court of highest instance is the Supreme Court, which reviews
decisions of lower instance courts by way of cassation proceedings. The Supreme
Court also functions as the court of constitutional review. Parties to
proceedings have the right of single appeal, i.e. if dissatisfied with the
decision at first instance they can appeal the matter to the court of appeal. If
the parties are dissatisfied with the decision of the court of appeal, a right
of further appeal also exists. However, this is not guaranteed: an appeals
selection panel at the Supreme Court evaluates the facts and potential of the
case. If it appears that the lower instance courts significantly breached
substantive or procedural law, the Supreme Court allows leave to appeal in
cassation. This system of appeal selection is necessary mainly to avoid dealing
with frivolous and vexatious complaints where the parties argue merely for the
sake of dispute and the substance has become secondary or is absent completely.
The resources of the state are not inexhaustible and administration of justice
is no exception in this respect; the principle of economy equally applies here,
Constitutional Review Chamber, operating within the Supreme Court and consisting
of the members of the Court, is also a body that enjoys a certain independence.
The Constitutional Review Chamber deals with legal issues that involve discrepancy
with the Constitution. It is inevitable that not all adopted legislation always
conforms to the Constitution. If a dispute arises in this connection, the
Chamber rules on the validity of the relevant norm. If the norm is declared to
be contrary to the Constitution, it is invalid and should be disabled. Thus,
the Constitutional Review Chamber under the Supreme Court has a certain
balancing effect, so that the separation of powers is not a totally rigid
principle to be observed at any cost.
division of the court system into three levels is not absolute. Significantly,
Estonia is a member of international organizations so that international law forms
an integral part of daily legal activities. If, for example, the European Court
of Human Rights rules differently on a case than the Estonian Supreme Court,
this lays a basis for reopening proceedings so that a judgment earlier pronounced
as final may be reviewed and a different conclusion reached.
addition to the division into three court instances, a triple division exists
by areas of law, in the shape of a distinction between civil, administrative, and
criminal procedure.
Civil procedure
is used in litigating civil matters. These are cases arising from relationships
under private law. The aim of the procedure is to ensure that cases are decided
fairly, within a reasonable time, and as economically as possible. Parties are
given equal opportunity to justify their claims and to refute or argue against
the other party’s claims. The parties themselves determine which facts they present
to substantiate their claim and what evidence they submit as proof. Throughout
the procedure, the court must do everything within its power to achieve a
settlement of the case or part of it with a compromise or other agreement
between the parties, if the court believes this to be reasonable. As a rule,
civil procedure is public.
administrative court is competent to adjudicate disputes under public law. Administrative
court procedure applies the investigative principle. This means that the court
must do everything within its power to ascertain the truth. If necessary, the
court collects evidence on its own initiative.
The main
principles of criminal procedure are: mandatory proceedings when facts of a
criminal offence appear; presumption of innocence; adversarial procedure
(parties have equality of arms in proceedings); ensuring a defence counsel
(when the accused or suspect is unable to hire their own criminal defence
counsel, counsel is provided by the state); guarantee of rights (right to be
informed of all the facts of the charges, as far as this does not damage the
interests of investigation); public court hearing; ensuring proceedings in a
language that the accused or suspect understands; principle of free assessment
of evidence (no evidence has predetermined effect); no one is required to
testify against themselves or against persons close to them; principle of legal
collection of evidence (evidence acquired illegally is generally inadmissible).
The criminal procedure also includes the possibility of a settlement (similar
to a plea bargain) which allows cases to be dealt with more expediently and economically
if the suspect or accused pleads guilty and consents to a simplified proceeding.
In that case, a long trial is avoided and the judge may impose a lighter sentence
than prescribed by law. However, settlements in criminal proceedings can only
be entered into in the case of less serious criminal offences.
Several
institutions in Estonia may handle extrajudicial settlement of civil disputes (not
already referred to the court). Arguments in favour of such tribunals usually
point to the time-consuming nature and higher cost of settling disputes through
court proceedings. In practice, the arbitral system has proved viable and the
number of cases settled is fairly significant. Importantly, the decisions of
arbitral tribunals may be appealed to the court.
- Lease Committee. Lease Disputes Resolution Act
- Arbitral Tribunal for Resolution of Insurance Disputes. Insurance Activities Act
- Expert Committee on the Quality of Health Care. Health Insurance Act; Public Health Act
- Arbitration Tribunal of the Estonian Chamber of Commerce
and Industry.
Enforcement
proceedings aim to ensure compliance with (or recovery arising from) court
decisions that have entered into effect. The majority of enforcement cases
involve recovery of money claims, in the process of which it is possible to attach
a debtor’s assets or take other measures to satisfy a creditor’s claim. Enforcement
procedures can also be used to reclaim dwellings or business premises from
unlawful possession. The assistance of a bailiff can also be used to arrange
access to a child (i.e. visiting rights) if one parent prevents the other from doing
Enforcement
cases are dealt with by bailiffs acting on behalf of the state (as
representatives of a liberal profession). In other words, the state delegates
its functions to bailiffs by law. Therefore, bailiffs must meet high-level
certification requirements established to ensure correctness of enforcement proceedings.
General Part of the Civil Code Act – provides for
general principles of civil law: passive and active legal capacity; the principle
of good faith; natural and legal persons; forms and general requirements for
transactions; and other general principles of implementation of civil law.
Law of Property Act – provides for real
rights, their substance and bases for their creation and extinguishment. The
scope of regulation includes the right of ownership and limited real rights
– servitudes, real encumbrances, rights of pre-emption and security. The
general principle of Estonian property law is to ensure wide-ranging protection
of ownership and lawful possession. A unique and notable feature is existence
of strong land register law, which includes a presumption of validity of
entries in the land register. This is especially important in that it enables
third parties in a legal relationship involving immovable property to rely on a
presumption that entries in the land register are genuine and valid and any
transactions entered into on that basis are considered to be in good faith.
Law of Obligations Act – regulates issues related
to transactions under the law of obligations, contractual relations, and non-contractual
obligations. As a rule, the principles of freedom of contract, good faith, and
party autonomy apply. However, norms applicable to certain types of
transactions may be imperative. This applies principally to contractual
relations where one party is clearly weaker, e.g. lessees, consumers,
employees, borrowers, policyholders. In that respect, the law provides for
minimum requirements to ensure the rights and interests of the weaker party.
Imposing a contract that is less favourable than minimum requirements is
prohibited, while a more favourable contract can be concluded.
Family Law Act – regulates family relations. The overall
purpose of the law is to ensure wide-ranging protection and welfare of the
family.
Law of Succession Act (valid until 31 Dec 2008); Law of
Succession Act (valid as of 01 Jan 2009) – provides the procedure for
succession and regulates relations between successors (heirs) following death
of the individual whose estate is to be administered. The law defines persons
considered as first, second, or third order successors. Succession may be
either intestate or testate. If no successors exist, the local authority or the
state is the intestate successor.
As of 01
January 2009, the new Law of Succession Act enters into effect. This contains a
fundamental change in comparison with the current law. Under the new law, a renunciation
system is applied instead of the current acceptance system. Under the renunciation
system, a person who is entitled to succeed is presumed to have accepted the
succession if they have not notified their renunciation by the prescribed date.
Under the acceptance system, it was necessary to submit an application to
receive the succession and only then was the succession considered accepted.
The Commercial Code mainly regulates the rights and
duties of companies operating in the business environment. The law provides for
types of companies, along with principles and rules for their operation, as
well as rights and duties of management bodies, and other important principles
regarding companies.
Employment Contracts Act regulates employment relations
between employers and employees in the private sector, as well as persons who
work on the basis of an employment contract in the public sector.
In categorizing
public functions, the Estonian Constitution proceeds from the dualist theory,
distinguishing between local issues (§ 154(1)) and state issues or “duties of
the state” (§ 154(2)). Local authorities enjoy universal competence in deciding
and managing local issues. Delegated authority (with respect to state issues)
emerges on the basis of a law or an agreement (administrative agreement)
between the state and local authority. Administrative law distinguishes between
general and special parts. The general part covers regulations, principles,
terms, and legal institutions important for all fields of administrative law in
general. This aims to include matters that are common, typical, or general. The
special part of administrative law covers individual areas of administration,
such as construction, roads, business, economy, social welfare, schools and
higher educational institutions. Individual areas of the special part of
administrative law are, to a greater or lesser extent, regulated by specific
Administrative
procedure is based on the idea that the function of administrative bodies is to
make decisions that are correct in substance. To ensure this, a fair
administrative procedure needs to be laid down as an indispensable prerequisite
for high-quality decisions and their recognition. The Administrative Procedure
Act is a general act that lays down common procedural requirements for all fields
of administration to be complied with by all bodies that exercise
administrative functions. Procedural details are regulated in specific Acts,
taking into account the unique features of each particular field. The
Administrative Procedure Act lays down general requirements for conducting proceedings,
including, most significantly: legality; proportionality, discretion; freedom
of form, expediency and efficiency; the investigative principle; publicity. In
addition, compliance with the principles of good governance (in its widest
sense) plays an important role. According to the principles of good governance,
public servants should not only refrain from breaching legislation, i.e. from
acting unlawfully, but they also have the duty, for example, not to be impolite,
careless, unfair, unjustifiably in delay with their response, abuse their
authority, discriminate against individuals or treat them unequally. Any kind
of insufficient, incorrect or irregular administrative practice should be
avoided. General principles of administrative procedure and good governance
apply to the entire public sector.
Estonia
has been able to maintain a liberal taxation policy. This has ensured the
country’s rapid development and economic success. Taxation policy is an
important instrument for promoting investment and attracting foreign capital.
Extensive
penal law reform took place in Estonia in 2002, with enactment of the new Penal
Code. This stands among the most modern in Europe. Great emphasis focuses on
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in criminal procedure. Important
keywords are also prevention and reintegrating of offenders into normal life. As
a rule, the treatment of first-time offenders is relatively lenient in order to
allow them a chance to learn from their mistake. Instead of imposition of
prison sentences, other forms of supervisory measures have been introduced.
These allow more opportunities for people to continue to lead normal
law-abiding lives.
Firms (home page contains publications in English)