Should you buy Exxon Mobil Corporation stock? (NYSE:XOM). Let's see how it does in our
automated value investing analysis system.
Hmm, we can't give any reliable projection for Exxon Mobil Corporation's
growth rate. The company either has too few years of historical data for us to
examine, or it's in the habit of losing money.
None of this means it's a bad stock. Maybe it's new and growing quickly, or
maybe it's turning things around. We can't say anything sensible about it, so
we won't say it's obviously undervalued right now. Proceed at your own
The PE ratio measures the
reported earnings of a company to its current stock price. While earnings are
easy to manipulate on the balance sheet, this ratio gives you a sense of what
buyers are willing to pay for the stock—what they believe it will do in
the future.
Comparing a stock's PE to the average PE of companies in its industry gives
you a sense of market sentiment about the stock and how well it fares
financially. It's not the only number, nor the most important, but comparing
similar companies is valuable. A ratio far above or below that of its peers is
significant.
Industries are more specific than sectors, so companies within most
industries are more similar than are companies within an industry. Be aware
that the size and customers of companies are important to their prospects.
The PE ratio measures the
reported earnings of a company to its current stock price. While earnings are
easy to manipulate on the balance sheet, this ratio gives you a sense of what
buyers are willing to pay for the stock—what they believe it will do in
the future.
Comparing a stock's PE to the average PE of companies in its sector gives
you a sense of market sentiment about the stock and how well it fares
financially. It's not the only number, nor the most important, but comparing
similar companies is valuable.  A ratio far above or below that of its peers is
significant.
Be aware that sectors are very broad, with many types of companies in the
same sector.
The cash yield of a stock is
the ratio of free cash per share—real dollars available after bringing in
revenue and paying bills—to the current price of the stock. It's similar
to the PE ratio, but it's less prone to manipulation through accounting
practices.
In general, the less you have to pay to make more money, the better.
The free cash flow
jitter of a stock measures how much the company's free cash flow varies
from its historical trend, on average. While it's always nice to make more
money than you expected, a company with predictable free cash flow is stable
and good. A company with wild swings in its free cash flow warrants further
research.
In general, the lower this number, the better.
The dividend yield of a
stock is the amount of money paid out in dividends every year divided by the
stock's current price. While not every stock pays a dividend, many solid
companies pay good dividends. In general, the higher this calculation, the
better—think of it like an interest rate of an investment—if the
company pays dividends consistently.
A high dividend payout rate may indicate that the share price has fallen
recently. Be sure that the company is worth investing in before you chase high
dividend yields!
Based on our analysis, we believe that you should not buy Exxon Mobil Corporation
right now. It might be a good stock to own—we just can't prove
it with value analysis right now. Proceed with caution.
Does Exxon Mobil Corporation have a coherent story? Does it have a plan to
continue to make money? Is it worth your time? Only you can decide where to go
from here. Our investment guide helps you ask the
right questions, including how to buy stocks.
Use these research links for more information.