Tallinn , the capital of Estonia, lies on the southern coast of the Gulf of Finland, only 70 km (43 mi) south of Helsinki. At the historical and medieval heart of the city is the hill of Toompea, covered in cobbled streets and filled with medieval houses and alleyways. The lower town spreads out from the foot of the hill, still protected by the remnants of a city wall. Around the city wall is a series of well-maintained green parks, great for strolling.
The city's old town has been astonishingly well preserved and was inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 1997, it is now in better shape than ever, with the bigger roads converted into fashionable shopping streets reminiscent of Zürich or Geneva.  Especially in summer, the Old Town is packed with tourists, with the traditional daytrippers from Helsinki increasingly supplemented by Europeans taking advantage of cheap flights.
Alas, the new town sprawling all around is largely built in typical concrete Soviet style, now joined with glass-and-steel cubes celebrating the post-Soviet economic boom.  The new centre of town is Vabaduse väljak (Freedom Square) at the edge of the old town, and nearby is the giant matchbox of Hotel Viru, the former Intourist flagship and notorious den of Cold War intrigue (every room was tapped and monitored by the KGB!).
Tallinn is a historic city dating back to the medieval times and it was first recorded on a world map in 1154, although the first fortress was built on Toompea in 1050. In 1219, the city was conquered by Valdemar II of Denmark, but it was soon sold to the Hanseatic League in 1285. The city, known as Reval at the time, prospered as a trading town in the 14th century, and much of Tallinn's historic center was built at this time.
Tallinn then became a pawn in the geopolitical games of its big neighbours, passing into Swedish hands in 1561 and then to Russia under Peter the Great in 1710. By World War I and the ensuing brief Estonian independence (starting 1918) Tallinn's population had reached 150,000.
Estonia was eventually occupied by the Soviet Union in 1940, only to be conquered by Nazi Germany (1941-44) and then retaken by the Soviets. In World War II, the city was quite extensively bombed by the Soviets, although luckily the medieval town remains. The Soviet Union undertook a program of massive Slavic migration, and just over 40% of Tallinn's current inhabitants are Slavic (compared to an average of 28% for the entire country). On Aug 20, 1991, Estonia declared independence and Tallinn became its capital once again.
Today, Tallinn is a bustling, gleaming metropolis of over 430,000 people. However, among the tall glassy buildings and corporate headquarters, Tallinn retains an inner charm seldom found anywhere else. Estonians consider themselves to be living in a Northern European/Scandinavian or an eastern European country depending on who you ask, with very close ties to Finland (ethnic, linguistic, and cultural), and visiting Tallinn you will find a mix of at least three architectures in this very visual city -- old Europe (the city walls with rustic buildings and charming living areas with well-preserved and colourful wooden houses of bourgeois taste of 1920s), Soviet brutalist (concrete apartment blocks), and modern Europe (including McDonald's next to the city walls!).
The most common ferry route is from Helsinki, Finland to Tallinn Port [7], which has upwards of 20 departures daily.  Depending on the ferry, journey time is anywhere from 1.5 to 3.5 hours.  Prices average €16-30 one way, depending on operator, season (summer costs more), day of week (Fri and Sat cost more) and time of day (to Tallinn in the morning and back in the evening is popular and hence more expensive).  Particularly popular are day cruises, which can go for as little as €19 return.  All ferries except Linda Line's catamarans can also carry cars, from €25 one way.
The following companies operate ferries between Tallinn and Helsinki
Tallink also offers a year-round daily overnight service from Stockholm taking 16 hours.
All ferries except Linda Line dock at Reisisadam port, to the north of the center. Tallink uses Terminal D at the south-eastern side of the bay and Eckerö and Viking the Terminal A/B at the northwestern side. From there, bus #2 operates to both the city center (A. Laikmaa stop), inter-city bus station (Autobussijaam stop) and the airport (Lennujaam stop). Alternatively, you can take a leisurely 15 minute walk, first west to Mere pst and then down to Viru Square. View a map of route 2[12].
Linda Line uses the Linnahall terminal, a short distance to the west from Reisisadam, and is also within walking distance, with a stop for bus #2.  The journey from the port to the city center is not all that impressive but don't be shocked - this isn't the real Tallinn!
Port of Tallinn[13] is one of the biggest cruise and passenger ports in the Baltics. Over 30 cruise lines call on the port of Tallinn during the tourist season.  Cruise vessels are mainly accommodated in the Old City Harbour, which is less than a mile northeast of the Old Town. Within the port area, there are several passenger terminals; free public WiFi areas are in both A and D terminals.
Buses, trolleys and trams operate regularly from 6 a.m. to 11 p.m. Bus, trolley and tram tickets can be purchased at newsstands in the terminal for 0,96 EUR or from the driver for 1,6 EUR.  Bus no. 2 runs between the harbour (bus stops at A and D terminals) and airport via city centre. You can also hop on a red hop-on/hop-off bus stopping in the harbour, only the price is a lot higher. There is also a tram (tram lines 1 and 2) stop in the proximity of the harbour area.
If you take a taxi, take a close look at the yellow price list, which is posted on the right side rear door. Make sure the taxi driver holds an operator’s card – a white plastic card with the driver’s photo and name, attached to the middle of the dashboard.  When starting out make sure the taximeter is turned on. The driver is not allowed to charge more than indicated on the meter. The driver must be paid in Euros. Ask the taxi driver for a receipt from the meter’s printer. If the meter or printer is out of order, the driver should not be in service, and you have the right to refuse from paying the fare.
Perhaps the easiest way to get to Old Town is by walking, less than a mile to the southwest (see map[14]).  Find the blue line painted on the pavement, and follow it to the Port Gate.  After exiting the port gate, proceed across the street, then turn left with the crosswalks.  At the next big cross street, Sadama, turn right (west).  Walk a couple of long blocks west on Sadama, then you will come to a confusing intersection with many lanes of traffic.  Make your way carefully across the lanes of traffic and head towards the tall church spire (St. Olav's).  A round stout stone tower (Fat Margaret Tower) should come into view; the north gate is to the right of it.
Tallinn Airport [15] (AKA "Lennart Meri Tallinn Airport" or "Ülemiste Airport") (IATA: TLL) (ICAO: EETN) is a small airport located 5 km from the city center on the eastern shore of Lake Ülemiste. The flight timetable is available online [16]. A decent and reasonably priced cafe (open 8–20) can be found on the 2nd floor, above the departure area (before security control). Cafes beyond the security are more expensive, as usual. Free Wi-Fi is available throughout the terminal building. There is a designated room for smokers - a glass "gas chamber", with a few tables, but ventilation is imperfect.
The following airlines operate service to/from Tallinn Airport:
To travel between the airport and the city:
Around midnight, taxis often collect passengers from far before the taxi column, so booking one before arrival is highly recommended.
Copterline [20] runs a helicopter service from Helsinki. 8 flights (mon-fri) both directions, prices starting from 129 €.
Elron [21] operates a limited train service within Estonia.
Frequent buses operate between Tallinn and other cities in Estonia.  Domestic bus schedules and prices can be found at Tpilet.ee [22] and Peatus.ee [23].
Frequent buses also operate between Tallinn and Riga, Latvia with continuing service to Vilnius, Lithuania and the rest of Europe. Buses also run between Tallinn and St. Petersburg, Russia (€30, 8 hours). Free wi-fi is usually available on board.
The following bus companies operate international bus service to/from Tallinn:
The Old City is best navigated on foot, not that you have much choice. A network of buses, trams and trolleybuses covers the rest of the city. There is an abundance of relatively cheap taxis. Before you jump in a random taxi car make sure you check the price on the window of the car. In Tallinn there are more than 20 different taxi companies [28] and some can be a rip-off.
tlt  operates frequent buses, trolleys, and trams between 6AM and 12AM.
Timetables in English can be found here: [29] and maps can be found here:
Map: [30] (pick Ühistransport). Baby prams can be carried in most of the buses, trolleys and trams except for a few which have steps. For getting out of Tallinn, Peatus [31] is the public transport route planner for all of Estonia, searchable by points on the map or names of places.
All modes of public transport operate with the same tickets. Single tickets can be bought from R-Kiosks or by mobile phones for €1, or from the drivers for €1.60. In addition the following ticket options are available: 10-ticket book (€8), 24-hour ticket (€5 including the €2 deposit for the rechargeable travel card), 72-hour ticket (€7.50), 10-day ticket (€11), 30-day ticket (€25), 90-day ticket (€50). Discounts are given to students and Tallinn residents. The Tallinn Card [32] includes unlimited use of public transportation.
The bus network covers the whole city.
Tourist bus tours (look for the red-colored buses) are also available at designated stops in the Old Town.
The tram network covers the city centre.[33] There are 4 routes and they all meet at Viru Center, at stop Hobujaama. About 15 carriages have a lowered middle-section, which makes trams wheelchair-accessible. Departure times of those carriages are marked with a yellow background in the schedules. Usually these vehicles serve routes 1 and 4.
All trolley lines have a direction to south or west.[34] They operate on electric lines. There are seven lines, 1 and 3-7 and 9. The fleet is relatively new, though there are some old Škoda-s.
For first time visitors or day visitor, another option is to take the Sight Seeing Buses. It provides good commentary on the history of the city and its various attractions. The tickets are available inside the terminal just near the exit gate or at the bus stop itself. Please note there are around 2-3 operators - City Tour, City SightSeeing Tour and they have similar buses and prices but the tickets are not interchangeable. Ticket rates for one day  are 13 euros for just the RED line and 16 euros for ALL lines (consisting of RED, BLUE and GREEN lines), while it is 20 euros for 3 days for all lines. Buying for ALL lines is preferable as RED line route is a very small and can be covered by walking by young people. Also check the timings of these buses at the various stops. These buses operates mostly from 10 am to 4-4:30pm, so plan your stops accordingly.
Tallinn has many different taxi companies and independent taxis. There is no standardised base price or price per km.  Some tourist scam taxis have absurdly high prices, and as long as those prices are displayed on the sticker in the window and on the dashboard, they are completely legal. Needless to say the locals never take those taxis, their sole modus operandi is to prey on ignorant tourists.  Do as the locals do and order a taxi by phone.
Do not accept offers from taxi drivers waiting at the harbour or train station. Same goes for any taxi that looks shabby or does not carry the logo of one of the reputable companies. Also be wary of taxis that look overly luxurious: large Mercedes, TV-screens inside, usually only a very small and vague logo on the door. Taxis hanging out in front of nightclubs often have the highest prices.
Like other large cities, Tallinn has its fair share of traffic jams and therefore is not for the faint-hearted. The road rules and driving style can be confusing to tourists. The one and two way roads change frequently and some signposts are not descriptive. That being said, traffic jams in Tallinn clear very quickly and if you are from a large city, they will seem like speed-humps rather than traffic jams.
The speed limit in Tallinn is 50 km/h, except some major streets such as Laagna tee, Pärnu mnt., Paldiski mnt., Peterburi tee etc., which have a speed limit of 70 km/h.
There is an abundance of parking, but you have to pay for it. The locations of ticket machines, and other methods for paying for parking, aren't always obvious. The ticket machines are not posted clearly. Here are a few helpful tips to avoid being fined:
Signs prohibiting parking are not always well visible, one example is the area between the Terminal D in the port and the Norde Centrum shopping center. One thing to look out for is signs in a form or another with the word Eramaa - this is Estonian for "private" and means that parking is either prohibited or available against a fee.
There are more than 180 km of bicycle roads in Tallinn. The Eurovelo international route goes from West to East, giving you good change to ride comfortable through the city. Many bicycle roads are located in green parts of the city and are meant more for recreation, although suitable for commuting. If you do decide to use a bike to get around, you cand drive on every road, even the side-walk driving is allowed, pay attention to pedestrians.
The Old Town of Tallinn is very comfortably covered on foot.
If you have a mobile phone, mobile tours in English are available for download on the internet.
Audio guides in several languages are available for small charge at the tourist centres.
If you are on a day trip to Tallinn for few hours only, then you can walk down to Viru street (10-15 min walk from Ferry Terminal) or take a taxi to get there and then roam the old city on foot. There are some great "lookout" points, where you can take in spectacular views of the rest of Old Town.
A flag system that regulates swimming. A green flag means it is safe swim, a yellow flag means you can swim, but it isn't recommended and a red flag means swimming is not advised, go in at your own risk.
Tallinn offers [62] a lot sporting opportunities - from ATV rentals to ice skating.
Tourists from European countries often opt for spa holidays in the city.
For more information please visit Euraxess Estonia [http://euraxess.ee/
English language teachers with TEFL certificates or equivalent are in demand.
Jobs for non-Estonian speakers are less common in other fields, although several IT companies (like Skype) have English based job openings.
For boutiques and souvenirs, your best choice is Viru street in the Old City and its side streets. There are many stalls selling traditional items like woolen pullovers, crystal and amber. Prepare to haggle.
Fashion-interested people could visit Estonia's first Post-Sovietic designer brand Ivo Nikkolo [94]. Main store is located in Old Town, Suur-Karja street 14.
The Rotermann Quarter [95] is a downtown shopping area with clothing and department stores and restaurants. It's situated between Viru Keskus, Tallinn port and the Old Town.
The Old City is packed with restaurants claiming to offer authentic Estonian food, particularly on and around Raekoja plats. Prices at restaurants near the Raekoja Plats are generally more expensive, yet offer the same quality of food, as restaurants off this main square. Prices are steep by Estonian standards, but still much cheaper than neighbouring Helsinki, which explains why on weekends they're always packed with day tripping Finns.
The new neighborhoods on the rise are Kalamaja and Kopli. Here you can find quite a lot of trendy restaurants opened up in old factories and such. There are no touristy restaurants or party pubs but nice, affordable restaurants popular among local people. It may not be too easy to find restaurants by just wandering around so it's recommended to check the addresses beforehand.
Tallinn's crazy nightlife is out of proportion to the city's small size. The days of armed mafiosos are over and these days any drunken fights tend to involve British or German stag parties. Exercise some caution in choosing your venue, as some strip clubs and regular clubs make their money by fleecing tourists who come in for a drink. In local places, beers cost €2,5-4.
Apartment rental is also a viable mid-range option.
While Tallinn is generally safe, various governments warn against the dangers of being pickpocketed or mugged, particularly in the Old Town. Watch your valuables closely, especially on public transport and at Viru Street.
The biggest trap to tourists in Tallinn is getting ripped off by taxi drivers or in "gentlemen clubs". Many of the latter are known for their exorbitant prices and hidden "fees". Credit card skimming and other similar scams are common practice in those establishments. Stay away, unless you particularly enjoy losing your month's pay in a few hours.
The stigmatized outskirts of Kopli and Lasnamäe are probably best to be avoided after dark, although both are a lot safer than the "bad neighborhoods" in Western-European or North-American cities.
People who arrive to Tallinn by camper van or just by car should be careful and not leave their valuables in their vehicle. Unfortunately it is not a rare thing that foreign plated cars get looted. Those crimes are committed mainly in the area of Tallinn's passenger port and nearby streets where most of camper vans stop. There are safer official parking lots, but they are often harder to find, their location might not be very good, and you have to pay quite a lot of money to park in there.