This luxury boutique hotel in Slovenia is the perfect destination for guided walking holidays in Europe and the beautiful foothills of the Julian Alps. We specialise in offering guided walking holidays in some of the most beautiful scenery in Europe, using our historic hotel as the luxurious base. The hotel is an award-winning Slovenian Cultural Monument dating from the 1600s, which has been renovated to the highest standards, offering luxury accommodation and excellent, gourmet cuisine. Our maximum number of hotel guests is ten so you can be assured of attentive, personal service and small walking groups. We offer week long guided walking holidays with accompanied walks 5 days a week, or you may choose to walk alone some days using our route cards. We are the best rated hotel in Slovenia on TripAdvisor, please click the side panel to see our reviews.
We have one aim – to offer you the best walking holiday of your life! We think all the above three elements are essential to a great walking holiday - beautiful, guided hill walks in an area almost untouched by tourism, followed by time to relax and unwind, and then gourmet dinners - fantastic food, eaten together with your companions for a sociable and convivial evening. Dinner is a highlight of walking holidays at Pri Lenart and is lovingly prepared from the freshest local ingredients, with excellent quality wine included!
Pri Lenart Hotel is situated is situated close to the medieval town of Škofja Loka, halfway between the Slovenian capital Ljubljana and the popular tourist destination of Lake Bled. Its position in the Škofja Loka hills, part of the foothills of the Julian Alps, makes it ideal for discovering the hundreds of miles of superb, varied routes, all in a relatively undiscovered part of Europe.
"Take the Slow Lane in Slovenia"	Pri Lenart reviewed by the Financial Times
"Slovenia has a reputation as one of Europe’s best adventure playgrounds"…	..according to Lonely Planet.
"Best small hotel in Slovenia; number 7 in Europe; number 17 in the world" ... as awarded by TripAdvisor 2014