Far-right politicians in France are calling for their country to leave the European Union after branding Britain’s historic referendum a “victory for freedom”.
Millions of British voters backed leaving the EU, with leave receiving almost 52 per cent of the vote to remain’s 48 per cent.
World leaders and political figures across the globe spoke out about the historic decision, with Marine Le Pen, leader of the Front National in France, calling for her country to follow suit.
She tweeted: “Victory for freedom! As I have been asking for years, now we need to have the same referendum in France and in the countries of the EU.”
Victoire de la liberté ! Comme je le demande depuis des années, il faut maintenant le même référendum en France et dans les pays de l'UE MLP
French far-right politician Marion Marechal-Le Pen echoed her aunt's views, posting: “From #Brexit to #Frexit: It’s now time to import democracy to our country. The French must have the right to choose.”
Geert Wilders, leader of the Dutch Freedom Party, praised British voters before calling for a Dutch referendum.
He said: “Now it is our turn.”
David Cameron announces his resignation outside Number 10 Downing Street
David and Samantha Cameron outside Downing Street as the PM announces his decision to stand down
Boris Johnson leaves home following the stunning EU referendum result
A triumphant Nigel Farage near the Houses of Parliament
Jeremy Corbyn MP, leader of the Labour Party, is followed by journalists as he walks towards the Houses of Parliament
London Mayor Sadiq Khan speaks to the media after Britain voted for Brexit
Leave supporters cheer results at a Leave.eu party after polling stations closed in the Referendum on the European Union in London
Supporters of the Stronger In campaign react after hearing results in the EU referendum at London's Royal Festival Hall
Vote LEAVE supporter Christine Forrester celebrates with others outside Vote Leave HQ
Supporters of the Stronger In campaign look dejected as results come in
The Houses of Parliament as dawn breaks on London after the vote
Stronger in campaigners look dejected after the result
Leave supporters celebrate opposite the Houses of Parliament in London
Labour Party Leader Jeremy Corbyn leaves his home this morning
A man reacts to a vote count results screen at an 'Leave.EU Referendum Party' in London
Supporters of the Stronger In campaign react after hearing results in the EU referendum at the Royal Festival Hall
UKIP Leader Nigel Farage at the Leave.EU party in London as he claimed victory
A London taxi driver holds a Union flag, as he celebrates following the result of the EU referendum
Traders react to the fast moving Euro results at ETX Capital in the City of London this morning
People gathered in The Churchill Tavern, a British themed bar, react as the BBC predicts Briatin will leave the European Union, in the Manhattan borough of New York
Traders monitor computer screens with the day's exchange rate at a foreign exchange brokerage at a securities firm in Tokyo
Conservative MP Nigel Evans (left) and UKIP's Paul Nuttall, members of the Vote Leave campaign, celebrate at Manchester Town Hall where the national result in the UK referendum will be declared later
Traders react to the fast moving Euro results at ETX Capital in the City of London this morning
But other European political figures branded today a “sad day for Europe and Britain.”
German vice-chancellor Sigmar Gabriel said: “Damn! A bad day for Europe”, while Anton Boerner, head of Germany’s foreign trade association said the result of the referendum was “catastrophic”.
He said: “That is a catastrophic result for Britain and also for Europe and Germany, especially the German economy.
“It is disturbing that the oldest democracy in the world turns its back on us.”
Further afield, Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said the immediate impact on his part of the Commonwealth would be “very limited” because it would take some years for the UK to negotiate an exit from the EU.
He added: “However, we’ve seen already large falls on stock markets and there will be a degree of uncertainty for some time.”
President of the European Martin Schulz said parliament respected the result.
He said: “Now is the time for us to behave seriously and responsibly. David Cameron has his responsibilities for his country, we have our responsibilities for the future of the EU.
“You can see what is happening to sterling on the markets. I don’t want the same thing to happen to the euro.”
President Barack Obama has been briefed on the outcome of the referendum, the White House said, and will speak to Prime Minister David Cameron.
It is not yet known whether Mr Obama will make a public statement.