You hear it time and time again: "The French are so rude!" Before I ever set foot in France, I heard the horror stories of rude French waiters who turn their nose up at you, snooty Parisians who refuse to give directions, or just French people in general who hate Americans.
When I went there the first time, I was braced for it. After all, I can be nasty too, if pushed. But I was pleasantly surprised. Not only were most French people I encountered civil, they were outright friendly, helpful and kind. They even went out of their way to help me! How could this be? Where were the so-called rude French?
But sometimes we like those stereotypes, particularly when we’re used to them. We used to go every year on visits to a brasserie near the Ecole Militaire in Paris called Thoumieux It was in the 7th arrondissement and quite charming, all decked out as a Parisian brasserie should be. The waiters barked at you, handed you the menu without a smile and took your order in wooden silence.
continue reading below our video
We got used to it and it became a game to get the waiter to relax. It was sometimes successful. Then Paris decided to run a charm campaign and trained the waiters to say Bonjour or Bonsoir with a smile, and listen to what you were saying. We walked in and the waiters did just that. But it wasn’t the same. Perversely, we wanted our grumpy waiters.  We knew where we were with them. Well don’t worry; it takes all sorts and if you’re lucky you’ll get the grumpy ones. Persevere with whoever you get; Thoumieux is charming and great value.
I don’t have some deep secret. Really, I just followed a few common-sense tips. Such as:
I've had French who pored over maps to guide me to my destination, who wrote down the dollar amounts when I struggled with spoken French numerals and who went above and beyond to help me. I've gotten help in English from many French. Try getting information in a foreign language while visiting New York City. So don't go with a prejudiced idea; treat everybody as you would at home and you'll have a great vacation.