Relax in Slovenia
Those who like hiking can tread the numerous mountain passes and gorges in the region.
The famous Valley Of The Seven Lakes at the head of the Bohinj Valley is a three-day slog for the hardy, but the gentler option of Mostnica Gorge above the village of Stara Fuzina is better for novices.
The Devil’s Bridge, at the outset of the walk, stems from local legend where a dog was sacrificed to the evil spirit guarding the bridge so it would allow the living to pass.
Poor Fido’s loss is our gain, however, as the gorge is a forest paradise. The crystal-clear river teems with trout, and carves a spectacular line through the rock.
This is nowhere better demonstrated than the remarkable Sloncek feature, where the water has carved an elephant’s head from the rock.
At the top of the pass the iconic national mountain Triglav (which translates as three heads) towers over the beauty gathered around its knees.
The villages of the upper valley all have charm.  Stara Fuzina boasts an Alpine Dairy Museum for a peek into the local shepherds’ lives.
Studor has an excellent riding school, the Mrcina Ranch, and the Oplen House opens a perfectly preserved window into mountain life a century ago.
Koparnik, on top of it all, has the Observation Point. It’s a 20-minute walk uphill from the village, but well worth the effort as the true majesty of the valley is revealed from above.
Slovenia's capital may have been built on a swamp, but you can abandon any sinking feelings when you arrive.
Ljubljana is a youthful town with more than 50,000 students and the social opportunities are plentiful.
You have to be over 25 to get into some of the late night bars, so bring your ID.
Jazz club Gajo is for the smartly trousered. Try Bachus if you’re 18, or Orto bar if you’re planning to be up all night.
Winery Movia on Mestni Trg 4 is the best place to taste vastly underrated Slovene wine with some Karst ham (Proscut) and cheese.
You could trip and fall into a bar at virtually any point around the city centre, particularly the “coast” – the east bank of the Lubljanica River, which has a dozen watering holes.
Stari Trg (Old Town square) has many places to eat and drink, and is home to some of the better restaurants. The River Café is trendy and serves horse salad.
The city has wonderful architecture courtesy of Slovenia’s own designer, Jose Plecnik. The black library is worth a look.
St Nicholas’s Cathedral boasts magnificent baroque frescos and a beautifully carved door depicting 1,500 years of Slovene Catholic history.
The colannade by the market place pays lip service to the Roman origins of Ljubljana, and the flower market is beautiful.
One must-see is the Castle above the city, accessible by a funicular train beside the market for e2.
It has spectacular views of the city and mountains. You certainly feel at the heart of the nation beneath the flag of the Green Dragon fluttering in a stiff breeze up on high.
Sloveni is peppered with sites of breathtaking natural beauty, and the three mighty glacial valleys at Logarska Dolina must be the cream.
They are the highlight of the Kamnik-Savinja Alps at the northern border with Austria.
Each is blessed with its own particular character and charm.
The elder statesman is Logarska Plest in the middle.
It’s a 7km walk through the trees from the Plesnik hotel to the beautiful Rinka waterfall at its head and, more importantly, the Eagles Nest bar perched precariously halfway up the tumbling torrent.
Robarnov Kot, a couple of miles down the road, is a quiet and unique landscape. The Slovenes plan to keep it that way. You cannot drive further than half a mile into the valley, nor cycle.
Park at the splendid Govc tourist farm (see where to stay) and grab a bite to eat before you start.
Once you’re on the plod, you’ll find yourself along a dry river bed in a Martian landscape.
It’s an hour round trip to the head of the valley.
Logarska Log is largely meadow with trees climbing the slopes.
All three valleys offer adventure sports, and in winter are in striking distance of the slopes at Krajiska Plenina. EATING
Feeding yourself Slovene-style is a hearty and novel experience.
In the wild, the Slovenes stick to what they know best, solid mountain fare fit to keep a bull elephant on its feet for a long hard day on the slopes.
Up in Bohinj, the Gostilna Rupa (Srednja Vas 87, Bohinjsko Jezero, tel: +386 04 572-3401) in the village of Srednja vas offers the best spread in the Upper Valley.
When hunger bites, get your mouth around local speciality mavzelj – spiced ground beef and pork, breaded and fried with buckwheat dumplings, sauerkraut and potatoes.
Up the road in Stara Fuzina is the Gostilna Mihovc (Stara Fuzina 118 4265, tel: +386 (04) 572 33 90), which serves a homemade menu for walkers. Try the goulash. In Logarska Dolina, it’s more top-level mountain grub.
Try the Tourist Farm Govc-Vrsnik (Robanov Kot 34, 3335 Solcava, tel: +386 3 839 50 16) at Robanov Kot for wonderful home cooked food. Try the beef soup (goveja juha) to start.
Sitting pretty at the heart of Logarska is the Plansarija Alpine Dairy Cottage, where you can feed your face on three courses for less than £10.   DRINKING
Slovenia's beers Union, favoured by Ljublanans, and Lasko, by the country folk, are excellent in terms of flavour and value. A pint is £1.50.
Wine lovers should try the Cabernet Sauvignon. Tolmen are the most famous bottlers, and usually fine quality.
easyJet ly from Stansted every day to Ljubljana. It’s two hours. Visit easyJet for details. Check out slovenia.info for more details.
For an authentic Slovene experience base yourself in a tourist farm in the mountains. You stay with a family and get your breakfast and dinner home-made every day.
The best in the Logarska region is Tourist Farm Govc-Vrsnik (Robanov Kot 34, 3335 Solcava, tel: +386 3 839 50 16). Locals flock here for lunch and the views are beautiful.
Hotel Jezero in Bohinj (Ribcev Laz 51, 4265 Bohinjsko Jezero tel: +386 (0)4 572 91 00), nestles on the shores of Bohinjsko jezero, close to bars and an Alpine sports company. Try the trout in the fish restaurant.
Hotel Slon (literally elephant) in the heart of Ljubljana is named after the elephant brought here as a gift to the Hapsburgs a few hundred years ago.
Rooms are spacious and modern. Slovenska cesta 341000 Ljubljana, tel: +386 (0)1 470 11 00.