This ballad sheet from 1803 typically demonstrates publications encouraging loyalty to Britain as a reaction to the instability of the French Revolution.
Depiction of the storming of the Bastille, Paris - the event that triggered the French Revolution.
The London Corresponding Society was established in 1792 ‘as a means of informing the people of the violence that had been committed on their rights, and of uniting them in an endeavour to recover those rights’ in the words of its founder Thomas Hardy. Soon the society was in communication with other reform groups in northern towns including Manchester and Sheffield.  The breeches-maker and LCS member Francis Place credited the Society with improving the morals and education of its humbly-born members, but the government regarded radical societies – especially those with an unlimited membership and nationwide association – as dangerous. Their fears were exacerbated by the violent turn taken by the Revolution, and once war with France broke out in 1793, the authorities sought to restrict the activities of reform societies under the guise of national security. British reformers, they argued, were far too similar to French Jacobins, the most powerful  and extreme revolutionary faction. Government-sponsored journalists propagated this message in the press, while spies on the ground penetrated radical meetings and provided exaggerated reports of treasonous plots.
Hannah More's Cheap Repository Tracts (1797) were politcally conservative stories that aimed to quell unrest or dissatisfaction among the British poor.
James Gillray’s 1805 satirical print ‘The Plum-pudding in Danger’ shows Britain and France, epitomised by their leaders Pitt and Napoleon, imperiously helping themselves to slices of the world.
[1] London Chronicle (London, England), July 14, 1789 - July 16, 1789; Issue 5114.
[2] English Chronicle or Universal Evening Post (London, England), July 18, 1789 - July 21, 1789; Issue 1535.
The text in this article is available under the Creative Commons License.