Palestinian leaders stoked the flames of violence during September and October 2015, spreading false information about Israel's actions surrounding the Temple Mount. Mahmoud Abbas stated that Israelis were “desecrating” Muslim holy sites the al-Aksa Mosque and Church of the Holy Sepulchre with their “filthy feet,” and encouraged Palestinians to carry out acts of violence against Jewish Israelis. The wave of violence experienced during late 2015 was due mostly to a Palestinian perception that the Israelis were going to somehow change the rules of who could access the Temple Mount, undermining Muslim supremacy at the holy site. The Israeli government issued official statements clarifying that there was no intention of changing the status-quo at the Temple Mount, but Palestinian leaders continued to incite violence against Israeli Jews through speeches and posts on social media. Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh declared Friday, October 9, to be a “day of rage... a day that will represent that start of a new Intifada in all the land of Palestine.” U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon travelled to Israel and met with various leaders in attempts to quell the violence on October 20.
One hundred and eight stabbings, thirty-seven shootings, and twenty-two car-ramming attacks were carried out by Palestinians against Israelis between September 13 and January 19, 2015. To read a summary of these attacks, please click here.
In response to these attacks Israeli officials ramped up security around the country, especially in Jerusalem and Hebron and at the Temple Mount. Israeli security forces also cracked down on Hamas leaders, detaining Hamas co-founder Hassan Yousef. Yousef was accused by Israel of encouraging, inciting, and praising the attacks that  rocked the country during the previous month. Hamas leaders, including Yousef, called for a new uprising against Israel and encouraged attacks on Israelis via social media and news outlets.
The United States slashed aid to the Palestinian Authority by $80 million for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2016, due to the Palestinian leaders continued incitement of violence against Israelis. This represents a 22% cut from the State Department's initial budget request earlier in the year. Florida Republican Ileana Ros-Lehtinen authored a Foreign Affairs Committee Resolution which was unanimously approved on October 22, 2015, calling for Abbas and other Palestinian leaders to be held accountable for the new wave of violence.  Ros-Lehtinen issued a statement calling upon Abbas to “[stop] inciting violence and promoting hatred, [and] to call for calm and work with the Israelis to restore the peace.” To read the Foreign Affairs Committee Resolution, please click here.
Facebook shut down groups and pages associated with Hamas and similar organizations in late October 2015, in an effort to calm incitement being propagated through social media platforms. Hamas leaders issued a statement on October 21, confirming that, “Facebook has closed, over the past two days, a large number of pages run by and close to the Hamas movement’s media in the occupied West Bank. Today and yesterday, [Hamas] pages [based] in Ramallah, Galilee, Nablus, Bethlehem, Qalqilya, Salfit, Tubas and Jenin were closed, as well as the page of Muslim Youth League in the West Bank. At the same time as the closure of these pages, Facebook has closed and frozen the accounts of dozens of publishers and administrators who run [them].”
The IDF and the Shin Bet exposed a terror network of 24 militants operating in the Palestinian city of Qalqilya, West Bank, on November 9, 2015. The 24 individuals arrested represented some of the main terrorist leadership in that district, who regularly received instructions and support from Qatar and Gaza.
Hamas transferred thousands upon thousands of dollars to the Islamic State affiliate in Sinai, Egypt during 2015. According to Israeli security officials, Hamas's military wing, the al-Qassam Brigades, paid the ISIS affiliate in Sinai to secure weapons shipments, which were then smuggled in tunnels between Egypt and Gaza. Egyptian security officials blame Hamas for changing the Islamic State in Sinai from a rag-tag group of rebels, into well-armed and well-funded fighting group. This revelation is an interesting paradox, considering that the main financial sponsor of Hamas, Iran, is fighting the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq.
A report was leaked in early January 2016 that exposed an Iranian attempt to ally themselves with Hamas in their dispute with Saudi Arabia. Iran offered Hamas financial support in return, but the offer was rejected by Hamas official Khaled Meshaal. Meshaal claimed that it would be “unwise” to intervene in the dispute between Iran and Saudi Arabia. A taped phone conversation released on February 1, 2016, captured Hamas leader Mousa Abu Marzouk berating Iran, claiming that the Iranian government has not provided Hamas aid since 2009. Marzouk said, “They are incredibly manipulative people. We've received nothing from them since 2009. Everything they're saying is a lie.” In response to these accusations, Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Hussein Ansari clarified that Iran was indeed still providing support in many ways to various Palestinian “resistance” groups, including Hamas.
Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh revealed on January 29, 2016, that the group was developing their military capabilities once more, in preparation for a protracted conflict with Israel. “There are those who think that the calm is a time of rest,” Haniyeh said, during his weekly sermon following Friday prayers, “But this is a continuation of the struggle. Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades are working and preparing for Palestine.”
Hamas representatives, headed by Abu Omar Nasser, arrived in Iran on February 10, 2016 to participate in Iranian celebrations marking the anniversary of the Islamic Revolution in 1979.
Members of the Izaddin al-Kassam brigades, the military wing of Hamas, expressed outrage in mid-February 2015 at the execution of a top brigade commander, Mohamed Eshtaiwi.  Hamas executed Eshtaiwi, a senior commander of the  Izaddin al-Kassam brigades, for treason and alleged “moral and behavioral tresspasses,” after he contacted leaders of Hamas cells abroad. Members of the Al-Kassam brigades who split off and began referring to themselves as the Free al-Kassam brigades, issued statements strongly condemning Eshtaiwi's execution at the hands of Hamas.
Reuters Bureau Chief in Israel Luke Baker was briefly detained and questioned by Hamas members while taking pictures of a new road being built in Gaza on February 25, 2016. Baker was stopped by a man in a suit as he was doing his work and was instructed to go with the man. The pair entered a building where Baker was introduced to a man who identified himself as a leader of Hamas security forces, who proceeded to questioned Baker while the two sat in a courtyard and shared drinks. The journalist was allowed to leave after a short time, and stated that he did not feel scared and was not accused of anything.
Members of the Hamas militant group crossed the border to Egypt and began fighting along side the Islamic State in Sinai during late 2015 and early 2016, according to Egyptian officials. The Hamas members arrived in small groups, via the last secretive tunnels connecting Gaza to the Sinai.
Israeli officials stated in March 2016 that they believed Hamas had replenished their rocket supply following Operation Protective Edge.
On April 18, 2016, a bomb placed on a public bus in Jerusalem exploded, injuring 21 Israelis. This was the first attack on an Israeli bus since the establishment of the Security Fence.
The Hamas terror organization carried out short-range missile tests on June 10, 2016, in an effort to improve range and accuracy of it's projectiles. Approximately 30 rockets were fired by the group, none of which were aimed at Israeli territory.
Israeli authorities arrested Mohammad El Halabi on June 15, 2016, on charges of funneling approximately $43 million in aid to the military branches of Hamas since 2010. El Halabi was the Palestinian manager of the Gaza branch of the large Christian charity organization World Vision, and had allegedly been working for Hamas since 2004. El Halabi was given a mission by Hamas to infiltrate the World Vision organization, and gain an influential position. In the 6 years that El Halabi worked for World Vision, he managed to transfer approximately 60% of the organization's budget to Hamas. In response to these revelations, both the Australian and German governments immediately suspended all funding of World Vision's projects in the Palestinian territories.
Waheed Borsh, an 38-year old engineer who had  worked for the UN Development Programme (UNDP) since 2003, was arrested on July 16, 2016, and charged in August with providing aid to the Hamas islamist terror movement. The suspect confessed to diverting 300 tons of rubble and cement from a UNDP program to a Hamas naval project, and encouraging UNDP inspectors to focus rebuilding efforts following Protective Edge on areas where Hamas officials lived. During April and May 2015, Borsh helped build a naval commando port for Hamas. The UNDP issued a statement claiming that they were “greatly concerned” about the situation, and would conduct a “thorough internal review of the processes and circumstances surrounding the allegation.”
The U.S State Department designated senior Hamas official Fathi Ahmad Mohammad Hammad as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) under Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, in September 2016. Hammad engaged in terrorist activity on behalf of the Hamas organization, and was in charge of security within Gaza while serving as Hamas's Interior Minister.