THE WESTSIDE IS HARDLY THE ONLY PLACE where anti-vaccine sentiments run high. They’ve arisen in working-class religious and ethnic communities — Orthodox Jews in Brooklyn, the Amish in Ohio, a Somali enclave in Minnesota — that in turn have been trailed by measles outbreaks. It also isn’t the only wealthy region of a liberal, cosmopolitan sensibility to harbor vaccine skepticism. These beliefs have impacted Manhattan prep schools and classrooms in Marin County in the Bay Area.
Historically, this kind of dissent has not emerged from affluent communities. “A century ago, much of the resistance was coming from the working class, who were most targeted for compulsory vaccination: in steerage compartments on steamships rather than first class, in public schools rather than private schools, in factories rather than offices,” says Brandeis professor Michael Willrich, Ph.D, author of Pox: An American History. “But the contours here are anything but. It’s the story of the well-educated, upper-middle class or upper class.”
Today, on the Westside, those who abstain from vaccinating their kids see refusal through their own socio-anthropological lens. “They’re well intended — the people that only want to do the best for their child. They want only natural products, organic foods, attachment parenting, family beds,” says Dr. Lisa Stern, a Santa Monica pediatrician. Observes Dr. Neal Baer, a trained pediatrician and veteran TV writer-producer (ER) who wrote an episode of Law & Order: SVU about the public health consequences of vaccine refusal, “It’s about not wanting to have anything that isn’t ‘natural’ in your child — this whole notion of the natural and holistic versus the scientific.”
For his part, Gordon sees in this stance a commitment to well-being that deserves respect. “These parents aren’t feeding their kids junky foods, they are making sure [their kids] are wearing their bicycle helmets and they just want to have a real discussion about vaccines — and [other doctors] just won’t have it,” he says.
According to those on both sides of the issue, this demographic is unafraid to take on the medical establishment. “They are not intimidated by the authority of the doctor,” says Brendan Nyhan, Ph.D, a political scientist at Dartmouth who has studied parents who are vaccine skeptics. “Educated, high-income people are more likely to feel confident in standing up to doctors or seeking out ones who are more favorable to alternative schedules and selective vaccination.”
Many irked local pediatricians, however, describe a parent profile defined by ignorance that’s sheathed in arrogance. They say these misguided guardians are seduced by anecdotes about “vaccine-damaged children” and are prone to confirmation bias (the impulse to favor information that affirms pre-existing beliefs). In addition, assert some doctors, these parents tend to believe hours accrued researching on the Internet and engaging in urgent conversations within their social circle give them the authority to debate the legitimacy of immunization with their child’s health care provider.
“It’s a sense of entitlement and it comes out of a customer mentality since they are often choosing their doctor and paying cash,” says Dr. Nina Shapiro, the director of pediatric otolaryngology (ear, nose and throat conditions) at UCLA’s Geffen School of Medicine and a vocal critic of anti-vaccine sentiment.
Of course, local pediatricians partial to vaccine skepticism harbor a more benevolent view of such parental involvement. “They are focused, intense, very well-read,” says Feder. “My patient population wants to participate. In the past, that didn’t happen; you did as you were told. Now they make decisions sometimes with or without the permission of their practitioners. I try to meet patients where they are and maybe take them a little further.”
Gordon concurs. “Parents have a right to participate in the discussion, to decide when and how their children are vaccinated,” he says. Fisher, with the National Vaccine Information Center, argues that the way doctors talk to parents about vaccinations must change. “That authoritarian, paternalistic approach to medical care isn’t going to work in the 21st century,” she says. “What’s really disturbing with that kind of attitude is the elitism that’s inherent.”
Skye puts it this way: “People want to feel like they aren’t being told what to do.”