(Reuters Health) - The rapid spread of a measles outbreak  from Disneyland in California to communities around the country  suggests that vaccination rates in some places may be as low as  50 percent, a study suggests.
"Disneyland is an international attraction and sometimes  people are coming from places where measles vaccination rates  are low or they don't get the recommended two doses, and that,  combined with the fact that there are a lot of pockets of  non-vaccination in California and people coming from all over  the U.S. created the perfect storm for a big outbreak," lead  author Maimuna Majumder of Boston Children's Hospital and the  Massachusetts Institute of Technology told Reuters Health.
This year, the U.S. is experiencing a multi-state measles  outbreak believed to have started at Disneyland this past  December, as well as three other unrelated outbreaks in  Illinois, Nevada, and Washington, according to the Centers for  Disease Control and Prevention. As of March 6, 173 people from  17 states and the District of Columbia were reported to have  measles, with most linked back to Disneyland.
Measles is a highly contagious virus that can be serious or  even fatal. It starts with a fever that can last a couple of  days, followed by a cough, runny nose, and pink eye. A rash  develops on the face and neck then spreads to the rest of the  body. In severe cases, pneumonia and encephalitis can develop.
People with measles can be spreading the virus for four days  before and after the rash appears, according to the CDC.
The virus can live for up to two hours on surfaces where an  infected person coughs or sneezes. People who breathe the  contaminated air or touch an infected surface and then touch  their eyes, nose or mouth can become infected.
About 96 to 99 percent of people in the community need to be  vaccinated against measles to effectively halt its spread.  Because about 7 percent of people won't get immunity from one  dose of the vaccine, two doses are recommended in the U.S.
Before the vaccine was developed, each person with measles  typically infected 11 to 18 others, Majumder and colleagues  write in JAMA Pediatrics.
Based on historical infection rates and the number of  individuals infected in the current outbreak, the researchers  estimate that vaccination rates in some communities might be as  low as 50 percent and probably are no higher than 86 percent.
"Clearly, based on the number of infections we have seen so  far, we can say that (the current vaccination rate) is far below  the level necessary to achieve herd immunity," Majumder said.
The timing of the current outbreak, starting during school  vacations for many people in the U.S., likely made measles  spread more quickly, said Dr. George Rutherford, vice chair of  the department of epidemiology and biostatistics at the  University of California, San Francisco, in a phone interview.
"There's nothing magic about Disneyland except that there  are a lot of people there," said Rutherford, who wasn't involved  in the study. "If anything, because it's outdoors and so spread  out, it might be a little harder to transmit."
Still, mixing tourists from countries where vaccination  rates are low, with U.S. kids whose parents don't vaccinate them  for medical or personal reasons, is a likely cause of the  current outbreak, he said.
"In this scenario, any one child with measles is going to  quickly spread it to just about every other child around them  who isn't already immune," Rutherford said.
SOURCE: http://bit.ly/1adWrco JAMA Pediatrics, online March  16, 2015.