In September  2016, this chapter was extensively updated and should be read throughout.
For the purposes  of this policy, an unaccompanied asylum seeking child (UASC) is any person who,  at the time of making an asylum application:
[1] Young asylum seekers who appeared over 18 but under 25 will usually be referred to Kent. Age assessment would be done as a standard procedure.
This policy  provides advice on the rights and entitlements of UASC.
In all  such referrals, the Procedures in relation to Child and Family Assessments will apply.
Where a  young unaccompanied asylum seeker comes into care, the procedures in this  manual relating to Children in Care apply. Independent Reviewing Officers need to be aware of local authority duties to take regard of the child’s needs as an unaccompanied or trafficked child when planning and providing for care. They must also have an awareness of the particular needs and issues children may face as a result of being an unaccompanied or trafficked child so that they can provide appropriate challenge at review. Foster or residential care providers need to be aware of appropriate steps to reduce the risk of trafficked children returning to their traffickers.
The Policy is  based on the principles of the Children Act 1989 which is to safeguard and  promote the welfare of children within the local authority area who are in need  by providing a range and level of services appropriate to those children’s  needs.
It also  incorporates, the Statutory Guidance for Local Authorities on the Care of  Unaccompanied Asylum Seeking and Trafficked Child (2014)
It further embeds  the principles of the Children (Leaving Care) Act 2000 which are to improve the  life chances of young people living in and leaving local authority care.  Unaccompanied asylum-seeking children and refugees who are looked after are  entitled to the same service as any other children who have been looked after  when they leave care. The definitions and commitments as described within the  Kent County Council Leaving Care Policy are therefore applicable to this group  of young people.
This policy also  provides guidance on the operation of the voluntary National Transfer scheme  between local authorities to ensure a fairer distribution of UASC across all  local authorities and all regions across the UK.
This policy  further underpins the provisions for the transfer of responsibility for UASC  and refugee children in England, under Part 5 of the Immigration Act 2016.
All services provided  will endeavour to meet the needs of the unaccompanied asylum-seeking Child by  ensuring that their needs are identified through an assessment, using the Child  and Family Assessment procedure, which recognises their particular  vulnerability due to their separation from their family and country of birth.
The services  provided are sensitive to the individual needs of the children, recognising  their vulnerability and cultural identity, including their ethnicity, language,  religion, and any other needs identified. All Asylum seeking children will be  provided with opportunities to integrate into the cultural norms of the UK.
Following an  initial contact and referral to our contact centre, we will ensure that the  referred child is screened and necessary steps immediately taken to ensure  his/her care and protection.
Assessed children  remaining in Kent will be supported to form a secure base from which they can  make the transition to adulthood.  Where  appropriate, they will be assisted to trace any family members who may be  living in the UK. Where the child wishes to trace family members residing in  another country we will provide assistance so that they can get the support of  the established organisations providing tracing facilities within the UK and  abroad. Where no family members can be found we will provide support in order  to help them cope with this.
Where an  unaccompanied child first presents in a local authority which is over the  ceiling of 0.07%UASC to child population, the local authority is expected to  arrange for the transfer of the child through the national transfer scheme,  unless there are clear reasons why it would not be appropriate to transfer the  child.
This means that,  any unaccompanied child now arriving at Kent’s ports are expected to be  dispersed or transferred to other Local Authorities within five working days.  Unless where there are reasons that to do will significantly impair the child’s  health and wellbeing.
To be eligible  for a service, a young unaccompanied asylum-seeker must be seeking asylum in  the UK and have no relative/supporting adult willing to take responsibility for  him or her. Where such young people are provided with services, they will  continue to be eligible for a service from the local authority where they are  granted refugee status humanitarian protection or UASC leave to remain, which  may continue until they are 17 years and 6 months.
As of July 1,  2016, Children arriving at Kent ports will be dispersed to other Local  Authorities within Five Working Days of arrival in accordance with UKVI  National Transfer Protocol.
Some children may  be referred to Kent Children’s Services prior to having registered a claim for  asylum; in this case the duty social worker team should arrange a welfare  interview with the Home Office through the appropriate procedures. Guidance on  registering the claim for asylum can be found on the GOV.UK website.
Where a child has  had their claim for asylum registered by the Home Office (by way of a welfare  interview), the duty social worker team must notify the central administration  team of the child’s reception into their care using Part A (Reception  Information) of the Unique Unaccompanied Child Record.
The UKVI will  respond to the referral within 48 hours confirming the details of the receiving  Local Authority.
If a child is  going to be transferred they will be placed into suitable and safe temporary  accommodation by the entry local authority. The duty social work team will  accompany the child to temporary accommodation, or arrange for them to be  transported there by an approved transport provider.
After the child  has been accommodated by the entry local authority for 24 hours they become a  looked after child.
The duty social  work team must ensure that the child is accommodated in the most appropriate  placement available which meets their needs for a short period of time while  awaiting contact from the receiving local authority.
Where a child is  below 18 and a female, she will be accommodated in a foster care placement.
Where a UASC is  16+ and male, he will be placed in a supported living arrangement at the  reception centre. No formal assessment is required.
The duty for  completing a child and family assessment is placed on the receiving local  authority in accordance with their procedures.
Where a referral  is received concerning an unaccompanied young asylum-seeker, the relevant Team  will carry out a Child and Family Assessment in accordance with the Child and  Family Assessment Procedure, to determine whether he or she is a Child in Need.  The Child and Family Assessment will take account of:
In determining an  unaccompanied young person's accommodation needs, the Child and Family Assessment  must have regard to his or her age and independent living skills, and consider  the intensity of service required. This may range between independent  accommodation, semi-independent accommodation and foster placements.
An interpreter  will be used to assist in all assessments.
Care of  Unaccompanied and Trafficked Children: Statutory Guidance for Local Authorities  on the Care of Unaccompanied Asylum Seeking and Trafficked Child (2014) provides that where the age of a person is uncertain and there are reasons to  believe that they are a child, they are presumed to be a child in order to  receive immediate access to assistance, support and protection in accordance  with Article 10(3) of the European Convention on action Against Trafficking in Human  Beings. Age assessments should only be carried out where there is significant  reason to doubt that the claimant is a child. Age assessments should not be a  routine part of a local authority’s assessment of unaccompanied or trafficked  children. Where age assessments are conducted, they must be Merton Compliant.
The ADCS Asylum  Task Force has worked with the Home Office to provide a set of jointly agreed  “good practice documents”. These documents are offered as practice guidance, by  way of assistance to local authorities and their partners. The use of the  proforma and consent form is voluntary. The content does not, nor does it seek  to, be binding on local authorities. It is simply a recommended approach.
The assessment of  age is a complex task, which usually involves a face-to-face meeting and often  relies on professional judgement and discretion. Such assessment may be  compounded by issues of disability. Some young people may genuinely not know  their age and this can be misread as lack of co-operation. Levels of competence  in some areas or tasks may exceed or fall short of our expectations of a child  of the same age in this country.
The advice of a  paediatrician with experience in considering age may be needed to assist in  this, in the context of a holistic assessment. However, the High Court has  ruled that, unless a paediatrician's report can add something specific to an  assessment of age undertaken by an experienced social worker, it will not be  necessary.
The child should  be offered an Independent Visitor and, if they decline, their reasons should be  recorded. Any Independent Visitor appointed should have appropriate training  and demonstrate an understanding of the needs faced by unaccompanied or  trafficked children.
Where  it is established as a result of an initial social work screening of the Child and Family   Assessment that the referral  concerns a young unaccompanied asylum-seeker, this will always satisfy the  criteria for services to a Child in Need.
Where  there are concerns that a young person has suffered or is at risk of suffering  Significant Harm, for example as a result of trafficking and/or  sexual exploitation, the social worker must discuss the case with the manager  and consider whether the circumstances warrant a Strategy Discussion/Meeting and Section 47 Enquiry.
Where a  Referral/Child and Family Assessment identifies that a young unaccompanied  asylum seeker is in need of services, the young person should be provided with  information about the services available to them from the local authority and  other agencies.
Where it is  assessed that the child is likely to remain in care and or with additional  vulnerabilities, Permanence Planning Meeting (PPM) should be held by the 2nd  review as part of the care planning process. (See Permanence Planning Meeting Procedure) [2]
[2] The needs of UASCs may be different from other  children. Permanency planning must take into account their individual current  and future needs.
A legal planning meeting, to consider whether a Care Order should be applied for, will be convened where the child:
Where a child is  looked after the Department of Health "Looking after Children"  materials will be completed. The care plan will identify a strategy to meet the  assessed needs. Placements must be able to support children who have little or  no other source of support. The care plan for unaccompanied asylum-seeking and  refugee children should include the following:
A child’s age,  sex, health, personality, race, culture and life experiences are relevant to  any consideration of needs and vulnerability and will be taken into account  when planning or providing help.
In reaching any  decision about the plan for a child we will ensure that they have detailed  information about the alternatives, in a language that they can understand.
They should also  be provided with an opportunity to explore properly the meaning and  implications of the various options open to them before a decision is made.
As far as  admission to school or college is concerned, UASCs have the same rights as any  other Looked After Child in Kent;
young  person is in care or moves care placement Part 1 of the Personal Education Plan  (PEP) should be completed at or before the Placement Planning meeting. Part 2  of the PEP will be set up within 28 days of coming into care and reviewed at  regular and defined intervals;
This Plan is  initiated by Children’s Social Care but is contributed to by the school,  Behaviour Support Service, carers and any other appropriate professionals. The  child/young person also has a major input into this plan and is consulted on  identified short, medium and long-term targets. If the child has special  educational needs or behavioural difficulties, Individual Education Plans (IEP)  and Pastoral Support Programmes (PSP)s aimed at addressing difficulties and  maintaining mainstream provision are set up and included within the Personal  Education Plan.
All unaccompanied  young asylum-seekers who are eligible for a service will be entitled to  financial assistance which must first be authorised by the person who has the  authority to do so. The social worker should arrange for payment of the  relevant amounts in accordance with the local authority's detailed financial  procedures;
Travel cards or  warrants will be issued to UASC in relation to appointments at the Home Office,  GP and Educational establishments where required.
All UASC who has UASC leave to remain in the  UK with no travel restriction can be supported to apply for travel documents to  enable them to travel outside the UK for a limited period, for holidays with  foster parents or on school trips. However, where there are risks of harm  (child trafficking, child sexual exploitation, radicalisation other source of  risks), a risk assessment must be undertaken and the local authority must be  satisfied that there are no such harm before a travel document can be applied  and paid for. In all circumstances, clarification must be sought with the local  police and the UK Visa and Immigration (UKVI) I before such decision is made.  The UASC must be fully informed of the process and decision to decline his/her  request for a support to apply for a travel document.
All children  looked after may experience difficulties because of their situation, the  combination of the above factors can only compound the specific vulnerability  of UASC.
A family or young  person may be refused a service where for example:
Where a Child and  Family Assessment identifies that a young unaccompanied asylum-seeker does not  meet the criteria for a service from Children's Services, but appears to be in  need of services from elsewhere, the social worker will refer the young person  to the appropriate agency which may be a different Children's Services, the  Refugee Council, the UK VI or an  appropriate voluntary agency.
In such  circumstances, the duty worker should make an appointment for the young person  and advise him or her of the name, address (including a map where necessary)  and contact number of the person with whom the appointment has been made. In  addition, the duty worker must send a copy of the Referral Form and Assessment  to the relevant UK VI office.
In all cases  where a service is to be refused, the social worker must consult his or her  manager before the decision is made and the letter confirming the decision is  sent. Any correspondence received in relation to the decision should be  referred to the manager.
UASC who go  missing from care, particularly soon after arrival, are particularly vulnerable  to trafficking. Specialist Children’s Services, in partnership with other  agencies, support UASC who are Children in Care up until the age of 18 and  those who become Care Leavers post 18. We take into particular account the  vulnerabilities of those suspected of being trafficked including their need for  safe accommodation, specialist support and protection. This guidance is related  to those young people who are UASC and who go missing and the process that  should be followed.
Where a UASC  child in care remains ‘missing’ up to and beyond the age of 18 years old the  local authority will retain responsibility to the young person as a Former  Relevant Child and provide appropriate assistance should the young person be  found or again present seeking support as a former child in care.
If a young person  has not been found by their 18th birthday then a formal Missing children  meeting should be held by the UASC County Manager to determine whether the case  should be closed.
The missing  children meeting should incorporate information from Kent police, UKVI and  other agencies where appropriate. The case should only be closed if there are  no ongoing concerns about the vulnerability of the young person being  expressed.
If the UASC  County Service Manager decides the case should be closed the social worker will  complete closure record and the case will be closed down in managed cases by  the team manager.
Any decision to  close the case should be on the proviso that it is reopened if the young person  is located and found to be in need of services as an eligible, relevant or  former relevant child.
Where young  people go missing and who have been placed out of Kent, but remain the  Council’s responsibility, rather than having been placed under the National  Transfer Scheme and become the responsibility of the receiving Authority, it is  necessary that there is liaison between Kent Specialist Children’s Services,  the Police and Children’s Services in the area of placement. This should be  managed and co-ordinated by Kent SCS utilising local knowledge so that issues  of logistics or distance do not interfere in early planning to locate the young  person quickly.
The provision of a service is dependent on the young person continuing to qualify for the service Services to an unaccompanied young person may be withdrawn for example:
The  service should not be withdrawn without the agreement of the social worker's manager. Any such decision must be clearly recorded,  with reasons. In all such cases, legal  advice should usually be obtained before a final decision is made.
Where a  service is withdrawn, the social worker should inform the Finance Office, if  appropriate, immediately.
Where a child chooses to exit care prior to their 18th  birthday, the Ceasing To Be Looked After Policy.
Where an  unaccompanied young asylum-seeker reaches the age of 18, and the young person's  legal status remains unresolved, a referral to the UK VI should be made.
Where the young  person is Looked After, the case will remain with the Leaving Care Team on the  young person's 18th birthday and the 16 Plus Team will be responsible for  implementing the procedures in relation to Eligible Young People and Relevant  Young People, as appropriate, in accordance with Leaving Care Procedures.
Pathway planning  should address any additional needs arising from the young person’s immigration  issues.
Planning may have  to be based around short-term achievable goals whilst entitlement to remain in  the UK is being determined. For the majority of unaccompanied children who do  not have permanent immigration status, transition planning should initially  take a dual or triple planning perspective, which, over time should be refined  as the young person’s immigration status is resolved. Planning cannot pre-empt  the outcome of any immigration decision and may be based on:
Assistance should  be given in advance of their 18th birthday with the necessary applications for  housing, Housing Benefit and any other relevant benefits. The social worker  must ensure that the young person has accommodation to which to move on his or  her 18th birthday. The social worker must also ensure that the provider of the  young person's present accommodation and the Finance Office is informed when  the accommodation arrangement will end.
Where a  young person is Looked After, his or her case will be reviewed in accordance  with the Child in Care Reviews Procedure.
Any  other services provided should be reviewed at least every 6 months as set out  in the Child in Need  Procedure.
In  advance of each review, the social worker will send the young person a  Checklist setting out the documents which the social worker requires to be  produced at the Review, such as confirmation of registration with a GP,  enrolment at schools/college and updated information concerning their asylum  status.
The  young person should be invited to the Review and an interpreter should be  booked as necessary.
Where a  Review confirms the service, the Financial Assessment Form should be  updated. Where additional support  services are identified as necessary, the Plan should be updated to reflect  this.
Where  services are withdrawn as a result of the Review, the relevant teams should be  notified immediately.
The law on the  withdrawal of Local Authority support to young people is included in the  Schedule 3 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which prevents  certain groups of migrants from accessing “leaving care” and other types of  support.  Some young people whose has  exhausted all appeal processes and in the care of Kent County Council may fall  under paragraph 7 of this Schedule which outlines the category of people  “unlawfully in the UK”.
The law states  that young people who are considered to be ‘failed asylum seekers’ or have exhausted their appeal rights to remain in the UK (ARE) may continue to receive  leaving care support from social services for an extended period of three  months as directed by the UKVI (Home office funding: Leaving care, post 18  years age).
The local authority  may be able to provide accommodation, subsistence and/or other support to the  care leaver after a Human Rights Assessment has been carried out and one of the  following conditions is met (Schedule 3 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum Act 2002 as amended by the Immigration Act 2016).