Main characteristics of the Mexican Health System
Ministry of Health at federal and state level
Package of comprehensive health services. Different service packages according to age group, target indicator (maternal health), or disease (NCCDs, CA, etc.)
State level ministries participate through a compulsory matching of some public funds, infrastructure and human resources
Ambulatory care at community health centers throughout the country, second and third level hospitals, and specialized interventions at general and specialized hospitals
Insured through an employer; covers individual and their dependents (children or parents)
IMSS has a package of coverage schemes, the most important of which are: a) sickness and maternity insurance, b) disability, unemployment, old age, and death insurance, c) labor risk insurance, and d) day care centers. Includes ambulatory care clinics, specialization clinics and hospitals
a) Public funds from general taxes,
A second option of voluntary affiliation, irrespective of working status, to either a health services-only scheme or a full-benefit scheme was recently implemented. This option now represents approximately 5 % of all insured citizens
Insurance comes from employment in federal/state government institutions
Three-way funding scheme: employer, employee, and public funds from general taxes. The government as the employer covers some of this fee, the public funds another portion, and the rest is provided by the employee
Package of medical insurance, disability, old age and unemployment schemes
Those with no social security or public insurance (users of private consultant services) and those with private insurance schemes
Out-of pocket payments, health insurance policies for major interventions and ambulatory care based on co-payments
Mainly specialist consultant and hospital services
Updated and modified from original table in Lopez-Ortega et al. (2007), using Census 2010 data: INEGI (2010). Tabulados Básicos, Censo de Población y Vivienda 2010. México. INEGI
Social Security institutions provide services to nongovernment employees and their families through the IMSS, and for government employees (and families), the Institute of Social Services for State Employees, ISSSTE is the main provider.
SEGURO POPULAR is an income-based health care insurance, introduced in 2003 by the Ministry of Health, available to all non-salaried workers who cannot access social security because they do not have an employer. It includes independent workers, as well as those who do not participate in the labor force (i.e., homemakers and elderly people, etc). This institution provides financial protection for more than 50 million Mexicans, and is improving access to health services and reducing the prevalence of catastrophic and impoverishing health expenditures, especially for the poor. A small subset of the population is covered by private insurance. Important differences can be observed between the benefits received by individuals affiliated with the social security institutions and those offered through Seguro Popular [12, 13].
Healthcare coverage for the elderly in Mexico
A long-term care system aimed at care for the elderly is nonexistent at the federal level, and thus the states are left with the task and responsibility of choosing what services, if any, they provide. Scarce data is available on federal level programs caring only for older adults or on institutions attached to state level agencies, such as the state level Ministry of Social Development. Besides services provided by the government there are some private (for profit and not-for-profit) institutions that offer some services, such as daycare and institutionalization for those who cannot take care of themselves and have no one to take care of them. These health and social care services are described below.
Regarding government provided services, most are an extension of poverty reduction programs or other social care strategies. The few social services available are provided by the National Institute for the Elderly, INAPAM, and the National System for the Integral Development of the family (DIF), a public family welfare institution that works at the federal and state level. For those who qualify, INAPAM offers career placement fairs, training, daycare centers, cultural centers, shelters and day residences, sociocultural activities, health education, educational and psychological services, among others, as well as training for people aged 65 and older to become ‘certified elderly caretakers.’ DIF is responsible for the “Day Residence Program” (Programa de Atención de Día), which provides daycare for over 100 individuals. The services provided at the state level varies according to individual state needs or the commitments declared by each representative to this age group and their welfare.
Given the disadvantaged conditions in which many older adults live, in recent years three specific poverty reduction strategies have focused on or extended their services towards the older population. First, Programa 70 y mas (70 and More Program) launched by the Ministry of Social Development provides a non-taxed subsidy equivalent to $40 USD per month, to those 70 years and older who live in a locality of ≤ 30,000 inhabitants and are not a claimant of Seguro Popular. The goal by 2012 is to provide 3,654,817 citizens with economic support, social participation activities and diverse additional activities, organized by the local authorities.
The second initiative is also supported by the Ministry of Social Development through the extension of the Oportunidades program in order to support individuals 70 years and older who are members of families already receiving benefits through the program. The extension consists of a monthly non-taxed allowance of approximately $25 USD per older adult and its aim is to support families living in poverty. Participants are required to attend a bimonthly medical consultation in order to get the support. Finally, there is a national level initiative within the System of Social Protection in Health, provided through Seguro Popular. The main objective of the initiative was to ensure access to health services provided by public institutions, independent of beneficiaries’ socioeconomic conditions and their current health status. In addition, it intends to decrease or eliminate out-of-pocket payments at the moment of receiving the services by establishing an annual pre-payment fee for each family covered. The two lowest income brackets of the population are exempt from paying the annual family fee. The benefits package include 16 wellness components for men and women aged 60 years and older that cover diverse areas such as oral health, prevention and control of tuberculosis, and diagnosis of diabetes, hypertension and obesity [14].
Some state level initiatives have begun to be implemented, the first being the Pension Alimentaria, a part of the Food Support, Medical Attention, and Free Medicines Program in Mexico City. This is a non-contribution pension estimated to have reached 96 % of all adults aged 70 years and older since its creation in 2001. The pension is provided through an electronic card that can be used in most commercial establishments in the City. The amount of the pension has slightly increased since its creation and was budgeted in 2012 for an amount of approximately $70 USD a month. In addition, the initiative includes medical visits for older adults aged 70 years and up who are physically unable to attend a clinic or health care center. Also, it aims to identify medical conditions and when needed, refers the person to medical services and informs the family members of this need. Given that these interventions for older adults were recently incorporated into broader government policies aimed at fighting poverty, it is too soon to know what their impact has been and thus, evaluation strategies should be incorporated now to achieve this end. However, they are recognized as a first effort to alleviate some of the main inequalities that render this population group especially vulnerable.
Within the private insurance sector, long-term care insurance schemes are now being offered but little is known about premiums, coverage and the total number of people insured through these options. Given the fact that these schemes are expensive, it appears they are only accessible to a small fraction of the total population.
Currently, few public institutions are in place that can cater to older adults who are unable to care for themselves due to medical or mental health problems. There are some private institutions that offer daycare and institutionalization, performing a wide range of activities. In addition, the current legal framework seems extensive but does not enhance or regulate long-term care. Most laws from the Official Mexican Standard (Norma Oficial Mexicana) are directed towards medical ambulatory or hospital care for the ill and disabled, and only one is directly aimed at the provision of social services to children and the elderly [15]. Secondary laws and regulations are urgently needed in order to regulate standards of care and the institutions providing such services, public and private.
Most of the scarce public institutions belong to federal or state level INAPAM and DIF agencies. While INAPAM has a small number of residences that provide comprehensive care to the elderly who have no family support or financial resources to cover their basic needs, DIF provides care for elderly people in shelter homes and related nursing homes. In 2010, DIF reported four homes for the elderly, covering on average 470 individuals [16].
An increasing number of civil society organizations (nongovernmental organizations) have been created; many of them work on topics related to the aging population. These organizations perform a wide range of activities, including those supporting the interests of disabled and elderly individuals.
In terms of the total number of organizations or institutions providing long-term care for older adults, the lack of a national, state and local compulsory registration system implies that disaggregated data from various sources must be consulted, making it complicated to generate a “full-picture” of long-term care institutions. Furthermore, it is not uncommon for data results to not coincide exactly among sources of information, possibly due to the use of different sector classifications. Few studies have been done in order to evaluate the quality of the institutions or the impact they have on older adults’ wellbeing. The most relevant have concluded that the quality of services provided is unacceptable both in private and public institutions due to many factors, including unqualified or inadequately qualified personnel, inadequate infrastructure and unsafe conditions, among other issues. In addition, they point out the lack of an adequate normative framework and mechanisms of supervision as a problem and as a consequence of the increased rise in institutions providing inadequate or substandard care [17].
Currently, the majority of the older population lives at home with their spouse or partner, children, grandchildren or other close relatives. Here, most of the long-term care they need is provided to them and within this pool of family members, mostly by women. Nevertheless, reduced fertility rates, constant rural-urban migration within Mexico and international migration, women’s increasing participation in the labor force and activities outside the home, among other factors, have changed family size and composition and pose future challenges to the availability of household care and support.
In terms of caregiver support, there are no special benefits such as tax incentives, monetary support or respite care for informal sector. For workers attached to a social security institution, leave schemes do not provide any special arrangements for family careers. Although there are some small studies on informal care and caregiver burdens, a country-wide study on caregiving for older adults and its associated burdens is urgently needed.
In spite of the major effort and burden of care being done at the household, studies of the health care system don’t take these issues into account. 2010 was the first time that firsthand information was gathered on what informal non-remunerated household health care represents to the greater system. The Health Sector Satellite Account generated as part of the National Health Accounts shows that 19 % of the Health Sector Internal was provided through non-remunerated health care provision (36 % public sector, 44.4 % private sector). In addition, when this product is analyzed by type of goods or services, this 19 % is almost equivalent to the 20.7 % of hospital services, almost two-thirds of ambulatory services (28.1 %), and represents more than double of what is spent on health care goods (9.1 %) [18].