Published:
13:13, 24 October 2013
Updated:
11:33, 25 October 2013
The gap in life expectancy between men and women has dropped to less than four years, official figures show.
Women have historically lived much longer than men, but that is changing as men give up heavy manual labour and more women take on the stress of work.
The ONS figures show that the difference in life expectancy has fallen sharply over the past 30 years.
A think tank said women are suffering ‘what were once male diseases’, such as heart disease and high blood pressure, as a result of ‘moving into roles that were once taken by men’.
Many are faced with the double stress of caring for both children and ageing relatives, as well as providing for their family financially.
The potential lifespans of men and women are more similar now than at any time since the early 1950s, when the life expectancy of women was just over 70, and men could expect to live only to their late 60s.
Life expectancy has continued to rise all round as all generations enjoy unprecedented wealth, better nutrition, healthier lifestyles and advancing medical science.
But the gap between women and men has shrunk by more than a third since the early 1980s.
Girls born last year are likely to live 3.8 years longer than men born at the same time. Thirty years ago, the gap was six years.
Girls born between 2010 and 2012 can expect to live 82.8 years, and boys 79.0 years, the calculations showed.
It means a man born now can expect an extra seven years of life compared to one born in the early 1980s.
The ONS report on life expectancy, calculated based on population and death rates, said: ‘Although both sexes have shown annual improvements in life expectancy at birth, over the past 30 years the gap has narrowed from 6.0 years to 3.8 years.
‘Although life expectancy is lower for males than females, males are experiencing large improvements at all ages.
‘The greater increases at older ages add to evidence that increasing life expectancy over the last few decades is mostly due to improving mortality rates at older ages.’
The ONS report did not suggest why the gap between men and women is getting smaller. However, one possible reason is the decline of heavy industry since the 1980s.
Large numbers of men have left jobs that had high death rates as a result of industrial accidents.
They are also free from the diseases that afflicted workers in certain industries, such as mining, in later life.
Millions of women who would once have been housewives now work in offices and service industries.
The stress of employment and commuting, combined with the sedentary lifestyle, can take its toll on health.
Many women also face the pressure of combining work with children and caring for elderly parents.
Kathy Gyngell, a research fellow with the Centre for Policy Studies think tank, said: ‘The narrowing of the life expectancy gap is indicative of the process of women moving into roles that were once taken by men.
‘We are increasingly seeing more women suffering from what were once male diseases – heart disease, high blood pressure, even baldness.
‘Women deal with the pressure of work, and many have to juggle part-time work and childcare.
‘We should not forget that many middle-aged women are dealing with both older children and elderly parents who need care.’
The figures show the proportion of
men who live to age 65 has gone up at double the rate of increase among
women. The percentage of men who reach 65 has gone up by nearly 17 per
cent since 1982, but the percentage of women living to 65 has gone up by
only just over 8 per cent.
year official figures showed that, unexpectedly, mortality rates had
failed to improve for some working women aged between 25 and 59.
affected included saleswomen, counter clerks, clerical grade workers in
local government and the public sector, medical and dental technicians,
and some creative workers like graphic designers.
The ONS yesterday picked out improving health among older people as a key factor in life expectancy.
‘Mortality rates at older ages  are thought to be improving  because of a combination of factors,’ its report concluded.
major factor is improvements in mortality from circulatory diseases,
such as heart disease and  stroke, partly driven by changing smoking
habits and medical and technological advances.’