This section gives an overview of UK education for children and teenagers aged 16 and under.
In the UK, children and teenagers up to the age of 16 must either be taught at home, or attend school.
All UK children and teenagers aged five to 16 are entitled to a free-of-charge place at a state school. Most UK children attend such a school. State schools are maintained and funded either by the government or by a local education authority.
Independent schools             (Also known as private schools or public schools)
There are 2,600 independent schools in the UK, educating around 625,000 children and teenagers (6.5% of the total number of school pupils in the UK). Most independent schools are funded privately from fees charged to pupils’ parents. Many offer scholarships and bursaries. Many independent schools are charities – any profits from fees are invested in improving the school.
A small number of 4- to 16-year-olds are schooled at home, taught by their parents or tutors. You can find out more about home schooling on the relevant government websites for England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. Another useful website is Education Otherwise, a UK charity offering support to parents who are interested in home schooling.
Scroll down to find out about international pupils entering the UK school system.
Age 3–4: In the UK, many children start their education aged 3 or 4 by attending a nursery school, playgroup or the reception or nursery class of a primary school. This education is not compulsory.
Age 4–16: Full-time education is compulsory for all UK children and teenagers between the ages of five and 16. All UK children are entitled to a free place at a state school between these ages.
Primary education is for children aged four or five up to 11 or 13. Terms you might hear are primary school, infant school, junior school, pre-preparatory (pre-prep) school and preparatory (prep) school. The terms ‘pre-preparatory’ and ‘preparatory’ are most commonly used in the independent sector.
Secondary education is for pupils aged 11 or 13 to 16. Terms you might hear are secondary school, high school and senior school. The term ‘senior school’ is more commonly used in the independent sector.
The Citizens Advice Bureau website has lots of information about the school system in the UK. Please note – this site presents separate content for England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. There is a box on the right-hand side which says ‘This content applies to…’. Make sure you select the country you are interested in.
In the final two years of secondary school (aged around 14–16), most UK pupils take one of the following sets of qualifications:
These qualifications usually require a mix of exams and coursework. Most students take a number of subjects – for example, a student taking their GCSEs might study between 7 and 10 subjects including maths, English literature, English language, physics, chemistry, biology, information technology, geography and history.
All of these qualifications are highly regarded by universities, colleges and employers in the UK and around the world. The aim is to give pupils a good grounding in a variety of subjects, to help prepare them for further education or for a career.
Most state schools in England follow the National Curriculum. In Scotland, schools follow the Curriculum for Excellence. In Northern Ireland, schools follow the Northern Ireland Curriculum. In Wales, schools follow the National Curriculum for Wales.
These curriculums are set by the government to specify what subjects are taught and the standards children should reach, to ensure that pupils receive a good education in a broad range of subjects.
Independent schools are not obliged to follow a government curriculum, but many do voluntarily. Schools that do not follow the National Curriculum generally offer a broad range of subjects too.
For full details, please visit the UK government website.
Depending on your nationality, you may need a visa to study in the UK. Find out more in UK student visas.
If you need a visa, you must study at a school that has been approved by UK Visas and Immigration – so make sure to check before applying.