This website is operated by Threadneedle. Please ensure you have
read and accept all sections of the important information before
using this website. By using this website you are deemed to have
read and unconditionally accepted the terms and conditions for use
as set out below.
Nothing on this website or the web pages of any
affiliate should be construed as an offer to sell or a solicitation
of an offer to purchase any products where it would be illegal to
do so.
Your privacy is important to us. You should read our
Privacy Statement and Cookies Policy to better understand how we
use your personal information.
We reserve the right to amend this Important Information
at any time by placing any such amendments on this website. If this
information is amended you will be required to read and accept
these terms and conditions of use again.
This information is not intended to, nor does it, create
any contractual rights whatsoever or any other legal rights, nor
does it create any obligations on us in respect of any other party
or on behalf of any party.
Information on this website is directed at persons within the
United Kingdom. This website is not intended for use by people who
are outside the United Kingdom, in particular those in the United
States. The information contained herein is not an invitation to
subscribe for units or shares in any funds or products
described.
Products described on this website are registered only in
certain jurisdictions. Please ensure, prior to investing that your
clients are eligible to do so. In particular, the products
described in this website have not been registered under the U.S.
Securities Act of 1933, and are not offered and may not be sold in
the United States or to U.S. citizens and residents or any other
person in any jurisdiction or country where offering or selling
such products would be contrary to local law or regulation.
Certain information on columbiathreadneedle.com is restricted by
jurisdiction and must not be accessed from different jurisdictions.
We will not be liable for any damages or losses suffered by any
investors accessing areas of columbiathreadneedle.com that are not
appropriate for their jurisdiction or investor type.
Information from this website must not be issued in any
jurisdiction where prohibited by law and must not be used in any
way that would be contrary to local law or regulation.
Specifically, the products and services mentioned on this website
must not be promoted in any jurisdiction where this would not be
permitted nor must any information contained herein be directed at
investors who are not permitted to invest in, distribute, market or
otherwise offer (or be the recipients of materials or offers to do
the same) the products mentioned on this website. Financial
advisers and other intermediaries are required to previously inform
themselves on the legal requirements, terms and conditions for the
acquisition, distribution or commercialisation of such products. No
one may link their website to the www.columbiathreadneedle.com
website without our express written permission.
All contents of this Website including, but not limited to the
text, graphics, links and sounds are the copyright of Threadneedle
and may not be copied, downloaded, distributed or published in any
way without our prior written consent.
Any information on this site relating to tax and tax treatment
should not be considered advice or a recommendation to any
individual. The value to you and/or your clients of tax benefits
will depend on you or their own circumstances, and tax rules may
change in the future.