The Florida climate guide is perfect for planning your holiday. Monthly weather averages give the best indication of what the weather is usually like for every month of the year including figures for temperature, rainfall and sunshine. Read more about the climate in Florida.
The climate guide for Florida shown below is for Miami.
Note: 0 = None, L = Low, M = Moderate, H = High, VH = Very high, E = Extreme
Metric (°C / mm)  |  Imperial (°F / inches)
Florida points to Cuba from the southeast of the United States and separates the Atlantic Ocean from the Gulf of Mexico. It is known for its beaches and sunshine, but the State's north also features inland lakes and forests.
Much of Florida is completely flat with low-lying coastlands, some of which is swampy. The north of Florida contains rolling country dotted with thousands of lakes, but nowhere in the State is there anything approaching hilly terrain.
The south of the State has a tropical climate with a winter dry season. The clear waters of the Florida Keys stretch south of the mainland, made up of a crescent of 45 islands joined by a series of long bridges. Contrasting with the cosmopolitan and modern skyline of Miami are the serene wetlands of the Everglades.
Water bubbles up through limestone in the network of waters called Silver Springs in the centre of the state. The subtropical climate of the central west of Florida encourages citrus groves, vineyards and the farming of sugarcane, vegetables and livestock.
The north of the State is known as 'The Other Florida', with a more traditional feel and a subtropical climate with rainfall in all months. St Augustine, the oldest European settlement in the United States, was founded in 1565 and is home to numerous historic forts and missions.
Winter temperatures in Florida are comfortable and it is mainly sunny. Summers are hot across the entire State, and feature rain falling in afternoon torrents on many days. There is a real risk of hurricanes from June to November, with one hitting Florida once a year on average.
Check Florida climate  for a particular month by selecting from the list below. Monthly climate guides include figures for temperature, rainfall, sunshine hours and sea temperature plus daily sunrise & sunset times.
Can't see your chosen destination? Use our A to Z search to find your required the holiday weather guide:
Sign up to receive the latest deals and exclusive discounts on holidays, flights, hotels and more, plus inspiration on where to go when
We promise not to share your details