June broke or tied 3,215 high-temperature records across the United States. Before that, May was the warmest May on record for the Northern Hemisphere - the 327th consecutive month in which the temperature of the entire globe exceeded the 20th-century average, the odds of which occurring by simple chance were 3.7 x 10-99, a number considerably larger than the number of stars in the universe.
There are three magic numbers to remember, ones that will help us understand the seriousness of the matter: 2 degrees Celsius, 565 gigatons of carbon dioxide, and 2,795 gigatons of carbon dioxide.
Last month the world's nations, meeting in Rio for the 20th-anniversary reprise of a massive 1992
environmental summit, accomplished nothing.  Barack Obama didn't even attend. We're losing the fight because, most of all, we remain in denial about the peril that human civilization is in.
At the Copenhagen climate conference in 2009 the accord drafted by President Obama asked for only voluntary agreements committing no one to anything, and with no enforcement. However the accord did have one important ingredient. It did formally recognize "the scientific view that the increase in global temperature should be below two degrees Celsius."  (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit). And it declared that "we agree that deep cuts in global emissions are required... so as to hold the increase in global temperature below two degrees Celsius."
So far the average temperature of the planet has risen just under 0.8 degrees Celsius, and that has caused far more damage than most scientists expected: one-third of summer sea ice in
the Arctic is gone, the oceans are 30% more acidic, and  the atmosphere over the oceans is 5% wetter, loading the dice for devastating floods. These impacts have led many scientists to think that two degrees is far too lenient a target.
"Any number much above one degree involves a gamble," writes Kerry Emanuel of MIT, a leading authority on hurricanes, "and the odds become less and less favorable as the temperature goes up."  NASA scientist James Hansen, the planet's most prominent climatologist, says: "The target that has been talked about in international negotiations for two degrees of warming is actually a prescription for long-term disaster."
At the Copenhagen summit, a spokesman for small island nations warned that many would not survive a two-degree rise: "Some countries will flat-out disappear." Delegates from developing nations were
warned that two degrees would represent a "suicide pact" for drought-stricken Africa. 167 countries responsible for more than 87% of the world's carbon emissions have signed on to the Copenhagen Accord, endorsing the two-degree target.
Scientists have said that there is reasonable hope that we can stay below the two degrees if we don't pour more than roughly 565 additional gigatons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere by midcentury.  The 565-gigaton figure was derived from one of the most sophisticated computer-simulation models that have been built by climate scientists around the world over the past few decades. And the number is being further confirmed by the latest climate-simulation models currently being finalized in advance of the next report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Since we've increased the Earth's temperature by 0.8 degrees so far, one would think we're currently less than halfway to the target. However, computer models calculate that even if we stopped increasing CO2 now, the temperature would likely still rise another 0.8 degrees, as previously released carbon continues to overheat the atmosphere. That means we're already three-quarters of the way to the two-degree target. And Fatih Birol, the IEA's chief economist. said, "When I look at this data, the trend is perfectly in line with a temperature increase of about six degrees." That's almost a horrendous 11 degrees Fahrenheit.
In the meantime, the International Energy Agency published its latest figures - CO2 emissions last year  are up 3.2% from the year before. U.S. emissions fell slightly following a warm winter and conversion of more coal-fired power plants to natural gas; China's carbon output (now higher than the U.S.) rose 9.3%; the Japanese lost nuclear plants after  Fukushima, so their emissions edged up 2.4%. Study after study predicts that carbon emissions will keep growing by roughly 3% a year, which will put us at our 565-gigaton allowance in 16 years.
There will be another opportunity to change our course in November, when the next Conference of the Parties (COP) of the U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change convenes in Qatar. This will be COP 18, having started in 1995, and since then the process has accomplished essentially nothing. We're in the same position we've been in for a quarter-century: scientific warning followed by political inaction.
In an effort to educate investors about the possible risks that climate change poses to their stock portfolios, a team of London financial analysts and environmentalists produced the Carbon Tracker Initiative, and the important fact that came from this report is the amount of fossil fuel we are currently planning to burn, derived from the amount of carbon already contained in the proven coal and oil and gas reserves of the fossil-fuel companies, and the countries that act like fossil-fuel companies. That number is 2,795 gigatons, which is five times higher than 565 gigatons.
The  2,795 number doesn't fully reflect the recent surge in unconventional energy sources like shale gas, and they don't accurately reflect coal reserves, which are subject to less stringent reporting requirements than oil and gas, but for the biggest companies, the figures are quite exact
As Rolling Stone puts it: "Think of two degrees Celsius as the legal drinking limit - equivalent to the 0.08 blood-alcohol level below which you might get away with driving home. The 565 gigatons is how many drinks you could have and still stay below that limit - the six beers, say, you might consume in an evening. And the 2,795 gigatons? That's the three 12-packs the fossil-fuel industry has on the table, already opened and ready to pour."
While 80% of this coal and gas and oil is still technically in the soil, it's already economically above ground - it's figured into share prices, companies are borrowing money against it, nations are basing
their budgets on the presumed returns from their patrimony.  Those reserves are the primary asset of the fossil fuel companies; it's why they've worked so hard these past years to figure out how to
unlock the oil in Canada's tar sands, or how to drill miles beneath the sea, or how to frack the Appalachians.
John Fullerton, a former managing director at JP Morgan who now runs the Capital Institute, calculates that  2,795 gigatons of carbon emissions are worth about $27 trillion. If you paid fossil fuel companies to keep their reserves underground, the cost would be $20 trillion.
Individual actions will not make a decisive difference in the atmospheric concentration of CO2; by
2010, a poll found that "while recycling is widespread in America and 73% of those polled are paying bills online in order to save paper," only 4% had reduced their utility use and only 3% had purchased hybrid cars.
Barack Obama has achieved only one significant change: a steady increase in the fuel efficiency mandated for automobiles. It's the kind of measure, adopted a quarter-century ago, that would have helped enormously. But it's obviously a very small start.
At this point, effective action would require actually keeping most of the carbon the fossil-fuel industry wants to burn safely in the soil, not just changing slightly the speed at which it's burned.  But the president has gone out of his way to frack and mine.   "Producing more oil and gas here at home has been, and will continue to be, a critical part of an all-of-the-above energy strategy," he said.
The fossil-fuel  has become a rogue industry, reckless like no other force on Earth. It is Public Enemy
Number One to the survival of our planetary civilization.
Late last month, on the same day the Colorado fires reached their height, Exxon CEO Rex Tillerson told a New York audience that global warming is real, but dismissed it as an "engineering problem" that has "engineering solutions."  ..  "Changes to weather patterns that move crop-production areas
around - we'll adapt to that." This in a week when Kentucky farmers were reporting that corn kernels were "aborting" in record heat, threatening a spike in global food prices.  It's not an engineering problem, in other words - it's a greed problem.
In 2009, for the first time, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce surpassed both the Republican and Democratic National Committees on political spending; the following year, more than 90% of the
Chamber's cash went to GOP candidates, many of whom deny the existence of global warming. Not long ago, the Chamber even filed a brief with the EPA urging the agency not to regulate carbon - should the world's scientists turn out to be right and the planet heats up, the Chamber advised, "populations can acclimatize to warmer climates via a range of behavioral, physiological and technological adaptations."
Alone among businesses, the fossil-fuel industry is allowed to dump its main waste, carbon dioxide, for free. Nobody else gets that break - if you own a restaurant, you have to pay someone to cart away your trash, since piling it in the street would breed rats. If you put a price on carbon, through a direct tax or other methods, it would enlist markets in the fight against global warming. Once Exxon has to pay for the damage its carbon is doing to the atmosphere, the price of its products would rise. Consumers would get a strong signal to use less fossil fuel.
It's not clear that the power of the fossil-fuel industry can be broken. Public outrage may be the key. In the 1980s there was the campaign demanding divestment from companies doing business in South Africa. By the end of the decade, more than 80 cities, 25 states and 19 counties had taken some form of binding economic action against companies connected to the apartheid regime.
There is much more to this article. It is well worth reading in its entirety. Click on the link in the headline to read the whole thing.