The information presented below gives detailed historical monthly average weather conditions along with exceptional weather occurrences. To maintain relevance to current weather trends the displayed information has been calculated using data collected over the past two decades. The climate profile is taken from closest available data source to Lake Crescent.
Throughout the month of December daytime temperatures will generally reach highs of around 7°C that's about 45°F. At night the average minimum temperature drops down to around 1°C, that's 35°F.
In recent times the highest recorded temperature in December has been 16°C that's 61°F, with the lowest recorded temperature -11°C, about 12°F.
The average daily relative humidity for December is around 85%.
The Heat Index is a measure of how hot it feels when relative humidity is added to actual air temperature. From this a comfort level is calculated providing categories on how heat conditions might adversely affect someone.
Comfort Levels: Given average maximum temperatures and humidity levels generally you should not anticipate any discomfort from heat (see heat index for more information).
The average monthly amount of precipitation has been recorded at around 70 mm, that's 3 inches. Throughout the month you can expect to see rain or drizzle falling on 18 days of the month, with snow falling on 2 days.
We calculate sunshine hours per day using our past forecast data. For December expect the sun to shine for an average of 3 hours per day. This represents the average number of hours in the daytime that the sun is visible and not obscured by cloud e.g. the average number of hours the sun is actually out and shining. Note we calculate hours of sunshine per day using our past forecast data, not observation data, thus it is an estimate and not actual.
The average daily wind speed in December has been around 6 km/h, that’s the equivalent to about 4 mph, or 3 knots. In recent years the maximum sustained wind speed has reached 65 km/h, that’s the equivalent of around 40 mph, or 35 knots.
On average the month of December is affected by foggy conditions on 6 days.
The temperature of water an individual will feel comfortable in is very much personal preference. What feels unbearably cold to one person for a swim might be fine for another. We have created our own Swimming Water Temperature Index offering a guide to water temperature and comfort levels for swimming;
In December, for the nearest coastal location, the temperature of the sea averages around 9°C, that's 48° Fahrenheit. Our index indicates for swimming this is considered cold and even the most hardy among us would find any more than a few minutes in the water uncomfortable.