The Court of Justice of the European Union has ruled that when an unaccompanied minor with no family in another European state makes an asylum application in more than one Member State, the country where the child is and where she or he has lodged the most recent application must be responsible for dealing with the application.
Human rights law firm Bindmans has been handling a series of cases about the removal of unaccompanied children from the UK to other European States where they have previously claimed asylum, based on what is known as the Dublin regulation.  Under this regulation, EU countries claim they have the right to remove asylum applicants back to the country in Europe in which they first arrived.
The policy of the UK Home Office and the majority of other EU states has been that they can remove unaccompanied children under the Regulation, with no planning or arrangements in place in the receiving country and irrespective of the welfare needs of the child in question.  It has resulted in dawn raids, forced removal of children who then face uncertainty and in many cases destitution and homelessness in the third country with no planned provision for their care.
The interpretation of the Regulation was referred to the Court of Justice of the European Union and today decided in our favour.  Liz Barratt, immigration solicitor at Bindmans said:
“We have argued that the Dublin Regulation requires a Member State to deal with an unaccompanied child's case, even if that child has claimed asylum elsewhere, unless there are family members in another member state and it is in that child's best interests to reunite him/her with family.
“The Court of Justice of the European Union has given a clear decision today which upholds our arguments.  This ruling will affect unaccompanied children who have claimed asylum in Europe. It is a welcome clarification of the law and will mean that the Home Office’s practice of removing vulnerable children from the UK to another European country must stop.”
She added: “This means that no unaccompanied minor will be passed from member state to member state during the asylum process. The current system has allowed the Home Office to take forcible removal action against the most vulnerable children in the immigration system, that is those with no family members, and this has led to instances of dawn raids by immigration officers, hardship, destitution and extreme distress for the children concerned. The Home Office will now have to stop this practice. This is a very welcome decision from the Court.”
Please click here for the judgment.