1. Data include the following types of institutions in the fifty states and the District of Columbia: domestically chartered commercial banks; U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks; and Edge Act and agreement corporations (foreign-related institutions). Data exclude International Banking Facilities. Weekly levels are Wednesday values; monthly levels are pro rata averages of Wednesday values. The data for domestically chartered commercial banks and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks are estimated by benchmarking weekly data provided by a sample of banks to quarter-end reports of condition (Call Reports). Large domestically chartered commercial banks are defined as the top 25 domestically chartered commercial banks, ranked by domestic assets as of the previous commercial bank Call Report to which the H.8 release data have been benchmarked. Small domestically chartered commercial banks are defined as all domestically chartered commercial banks not included in the top 25. The data for large and small domestically chartered banks, presented on pages 10 to 17, are adjusted to remove the estimated effects of mergers and panel shifts between these two groups. (See www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h8/about.htm for more information on how these data were constructed.)
2. Includes all securities, whether held-to-maturity reported at amortized cost, available-for-sale reported at fair value, or held as trading assets, also reported at fair value. Excludes all non-security trading assets, such as derivatives with a positive fair value (included in line 34) or loans held in trading accounts (included in line 9).
3. Treasury securities are liabilities of the U.S. government. Agency securities are liabilities of U.S. government agencies and U.S. government-sponsored enterprises.
4. Includes mortgage-backed securities (MBS) issued by U.S. government agencies or by U.S. government-sponsored enterprises such as the Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA), the Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA), or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC). Includes pass-through securities, collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs), real estate mortgage investment conduits (REMICs), CMO and REMIC residuals, and stripped MBS.
5. Includes U.S. Treasury securities and U.S. Government agency obligations other than MBS.
6. Includes pass-through securities not guaranteed by the U.S. government and other MBS issued by non-U.S. government issuers, including those collateralized by MBS issued or guaranteed by FNMA, FHLMC, or GNMA.
7. Includes securities issued by states and political subdivisions in the United States, asset-backed securities (ABS), other domestic and foreign debt securities, and investments in mutual funds and other equity securities with readily determinable fair values.
8. Excludes unearned income. Includes the allowance for loan and lease losses. Excludes federal funds sold to, reverse RPs with, and loans made to commercial banks, all of which are included in line 30. Includes all loans held in trading accounts under a fair value option.
9. Includes first and junior liens on closed-end loans secured by 1-4 family residential properties.
10. Includes construction, land development, and other land loans.
11. Includes loans secured by farmland, including grazing and pastureland.
12. Includes loans secured by multifamily (5 or more) residential properties, including apartment buildings.
13. Includes loans secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties, both owner-occupied and other nonfarm nonresidential properties.
14. Includes loans for purchasing new and used passenger cars and other vehicles. Includes direct and indirect consumer automobile loans as well as retail installment sales paper purchased from auto dealers.
15. Includes student loans, loans for medical expenses and vacations, and loans for other personal expenditures.
16. Fed funds are included in lines 26 and 31 by counterparty. Line 26 includes fed funds with brokers and dealers and with others, including the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB).
17. Includes loans for purchasing or carrying securities, loans to finance agricultural production, loans to foreign governments and foreign banks, obligations of states and political subdivisions, loans to nonbank depository institutions, loans to nondepository financial institutions, unplanned overdrafts, loans not elsewhere classified, and lease financing receivables.
18. Includes loans to real estate investment trusts, insurance companies, holding companies of other depository institutions, finance companies, mortgage finance companies, factors, federally-sponsored lending agencies, investment banks, banks' own trust departments, and other financial intermediaries.
19. Includes all loans not elsewhere classified as well as lease financing receivables.
20. Excludes loans secured by real estate, which are included in line 11.
21. Includes vault cash, cash items in process of collection, balances due from depository institutions, and balances due from Federal Reserve Banks.
22. Excludes most securities held in trading accounts (included in line 2). Trading account securities at some smaller domestically chartered commercial banks are included in this item. Also includes the fair value of derivative contracts (interest rate, foreign excahnge rate, other commodity and eqyuity contracts) in a gain/loss position, as determined under FASB Interpretation No. 39 (FIN 39).
23. Excludes the due-from position with related foreign offices, which is included in line 45. Includes other real estate owned, premises and fixed assets, investments in unconsolidated subsidiaries, intangible assets (including goodwill), direct and indirect investments in real estate ventures, accounts receivable, and other assets.
24. Includes liabilities for short positions and other trading liabilities to which fair value accounting has been applied.
25. Includes subordinated notes and debentures, net deferred tax liabilities, interest and other expenses accrued and unpaid, accounts payable, and other liabilities.
26. This balancing item is not intended as a measure of equity capital for use in capital adequacy analysis. On a seasonally adjusted basis this item reflects any differences in the seasonal patterns estimated for total assets and total liabilities.
27. Difference between fair value and amortized cost for securities classified as available-for-sale under FASB Statement 115. Data have been adjusted to include an estimate of tax effects, omitted from the reported data.
28. Difference between fair value and amortized cost for U.S. Treasury and Governemnt agency obligations, mortgage-backed securities, classified as available-for-sale under FASB Statement 115. Data have been adjusted to include an estimate of tax effects, omitted from the reported data.
29. Includes the amount currently outstanding of loans secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties with original amounts of $1,000,000 or less, included in line 19 above.
30. Includes the amount currently outstanding of commercial amd industrial loans to U.S. addressees with original amounts of $1,000,000 or less, included in line 10 above.