In this paper, we estimated the technical efficiency of 20 health systems in the MENA region at the country level using SFA. We considered three alternative measures of efficiency to enhance the validity of our findings. In particular, we employed a frontier analysis using life expectancy as output in the health production function, and we considered the well-known BC88, BC92 decay model, and TRE model. The technical efficiency estimates were compared among three models using Spearman rank correlations, and were found to be of similar magnitudes. We found significant time-varying effects in the technical efficiencies of countries under analysis, particularly in true random model where country-specific heterogeneity is taken into account. Our comparisons of the estimated parameters indicate that our estimated models are not subject to considerable misspecification. The output elasticities of our chosen inputs are found to be mostly comparable among our chosen models. However, among the three parametric models, the true random effects model that allows for heterogeneity and flexible development of technical efficiency over time seems to provide the least fit to our data, yielding quite inaccurate output elasticity estimates and identifying notable trends in the technical efficiencies.
Overall, the estimated relative technical inefficiencies in health systems seem to be rather low, but with significant differences between individual countries ranging from 0.2 to 21 %. The average technical inefficiency of 20 was about 7 %. With regards to the individual country efficiency analysis, the results showed that countries like Lebanon, Qatar, and Morocco were estimated to be, relatively, the most efficient countries, while Djibouti, Yemen, and Sudan were estimated to be, relatively, the least efficient countries. Among the 20 health system characteristics evaluated in this research, access to improved water and sanitation sources and the number of doctors were found to be the strongest determinants of health-system efficiency. Health expenditures, incidence of tuberculosis, and out-of-pocket payments also proved to be determinants of health-system efficiency, but to a lesser extent.
The MENA region comprises countries at widely different levels of social and economic development. So, a one-size-fits-all approach to improve efficiency is not feasible. For example, in the poor performing countries of the region such as Djibouti, Yemen, and Sudan, there is a need to meet the basic health needs of the most vulnerable population, and child and maternal mortality rates and malnutrition among women and children is a priority, while in high performing countries such as Qatar, (which has one of the highest road accident rates in the world, and injuries as a share of the disease burden is expected to increase), preventing injuries is a priority [40].
The MENA region is far behind the developed economies such as the UK, Germany, the USA and Japan in terms of the availability of doctors and health workforce. Given the positive effect on efficiency of increasing the number of doctors, as indicated in the results, it is important to increase their number and provide the trained, skill-mixed teams including doctors, nurses and beds. Apparently, doctors have positive influence on the productivity of other inputs, so that their net contribution is positive. This is consistent with the conventional notion that doctors direct the use of non-doctor resources in health systems.
The area of health expenditures has attracted increasing policy attention and concern. The MENA region spends about 4 % of its GDP on health care, lower than the global average of 9.2 %. However, rapidly rising health-care prices and costly developments in medical technology are putting upward pressures on health budgets. Improving efficiency while containing costs is a key policy challenge in MENA countries. The results showed that increasing health expenditures in MENA will increase life expectancy. However, higher spending will not necessarily translate into effective results, especially if spending is not directed towards the most cost-effective interventions or to the priority target groups. A variety of strategic options are available, and health systems in the region show varying capacity to adopt these options. A substantial investment in preventive public health programmes, such as improved accessibility to safe water and sanitation, is crucial. It is recommended to provide skill-mixed teams that can deliver preventive care and effective treatment at the primary-care level, which will facilitate adoption of the family practice model. Promoting healthy lifestyles to reduce the impact of behavioural factors that contribute to an increasing share of burden on disease is a vital step. More rigorous gate-keeping would reduce the number of doctor consultations and improve efficiency. It is also recommended to move from rigid input-based towards a performance-based payment system. This is of particular importance in the MENA region where fee-for-service is the principle mechanism used to reimburse health providers, so there is no strong incentive to constrain the use of health services. For example, adopting a reimbursement price list that gives more value to doctor visits, as well as decreasing the reimbursement price for hospital services, surgeries, laboratory services, and radiology procedures, is expected to encourage longer doctor-patient visits and reduce the number of tests. The saved resources can be directed towards more cost-effective interventions such as health promotion and primary preventions in turn decreasing the demands for hospital services and more monetary resources [41].
Similar to previous studies on health-systems efficiency, our study has some limitations. We stress two potential limitations of our aggregate analysis before calling for country level policy recommendations. First, because a simple empirical model was used in this study, there is a possibility of the omitted variables problem, which may bias the estimation of production inefficiency. Also the inputs and outputs used in this research allowed us to perform efficiency analyses of health systems, but we should also recognise their weaknesses. Health expenditure per capita and out-of-pocket health expenditure (% of private expenditure on health) are used as proxy to economic determinants of production of health systems. Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people) is used as proxy to environmental determinants. School enrolment, secondary (% gross) is used as proxy to social determinants of production of health systems. Number of doctors (per 100,000 people) is used as proxy to health-care determinants. The labour input we use is a good standard measure and sufficiently captures the variation of labour inputs between health systems. However, health systems may also use different technologies, so we assumed that the comparison health systems use similar levels of technology. Turning to the output measure, we used life expectancy to facilitate the SFA analysis, which may not reflect the real production of health systems. Second, a relatively small sample size and a medium short time interval of 17 years may limit the generalisability of our results. Despite our best efforts to obtain the necessary information to construct our production function model, data in panel were only available after 1995 for most countries.
In conclusion, we found that most of the MENA countries are operating, on average, with a reasonably high degree of technical efficiency compared with other countries in the region. Despite this, there is evidence to suggest that there are considerable efficiency gains yet to be made by some MENA countries. This research was an attempt to measure and compare relative technical efficiency of 20 countries to inform future health policy making and health planning. It is also an invitation to other researchers in the field to apply other quantitative techniques to provide deep insight into how health systems manage their human and capital resources on a country level. Only this kind of understanding could help us to be sure that we are moving forward in our journey to enhance the efficiency and sustainability of the health systems.