1. Which stakeholder in the U.S. health care system typically plays the role of intermediary and referee for the other stakeholders?
Providers
Insurers
Public policy makers
Consumers
Question 2. 2. Which of the following are associated with public health, as opposed to health care? Select all that apply.
Keeping people healthy
Restoring health once an illness has occurred
Protecting the environment
Making sure water supplies are safe
Ensuring that a community has a safe place for people to be physically active
Question 3. 3. In 2011, the per capita health care spending in the United States was which of the following, approximately?
$5,500
$6,500
$7,500
$8,500
Question 4. 4. Given the focus of the Affordable Care Act, there is concern that there may be a shortage of which of the following health professions to meet the changing health care needs of the U.S. population?
Primary care physicians
Licensed practical nurses
Medical assistants
Orthopedic surgeons
Question 5. 5. Typically, consumers with health insurance are most likely to be concerned with which of the following when choosing a health care provider?
Quality of care
Value of care
Copay amount
Total cost of care
Question 6. 6. According to the University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute, what percentage of ultimate health outcomes are determined primarily by personal health behaviors?
Question 7. 7. Which group of stakeholders should be at the center of the health system?
Providers
Insurers
Public policy makers
Consumers
Question 8. 8. About what percentage of the U.S.'s economic resources are devoted to medical care and health promotion?
Question 9. 9. The Affordable Care Act was designed to provide insurance coverage for how many people in the U.S. who were uninsured at the time of its passing (2010)?
12 million
22 million
32 million
42 million
Question 10. 10. Which U.S. President was instrumental in establishing Medicare and Medicaid as part of his vision for a "Great Society"?
Harry Truman
John F. Kennedy
Lyndon B. Johnson
Barrack Obama
Question 11. 11. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that the health care workforce could expand by more than what percent by 2020?
Question 12. 12. Which of the following are aspects of the current U.S. health care system that consumers like? Select all that apply.
Cost of care and insurance coverage
Consumer choice of plans and coverage
Access to latest medical technologies and pharmaceuticals
Care coordination
Perceived quality of clinical care
Question 13. 13. When compared with other nations in terms of health care, the U.S. may be characterized as having which of the following?
High expenses with large inequities in access to primary and specialty care
High expenses with small inequities in access to primary and specialty care
Low expenses with large inequities in access to primary and specialty care
Low expenses with small inequities in access to primary and specialty care
Question 14. 14. Public hospitals and health clinics in the U.S. are primarily owned and operated by which of the following?
Local governments
State governments
Federal government
Non-profit charities
Question 15. 15. The development of health care policy and provision of health care services are complex processes, with responsibilities shared across all levels of government within the United States: federal, state, and local. Which of the following are roles of state governments in health care in the United States? Select all that apply.
Develop national health policies
Fund and administer Medicaid programs
Provide health care for veterans
License health care providers
Operate facilities for the mentally ill
Question 16. 16. Which federal health program was enacted with bipartisan support due to the fact that it provides health insurance for children, who are considered a deserving group?
Medicaid
Medicare
Affordable Care Act
Question 17. 17. Which of the following countries has the most practicing doctors per 1,000 population?
United Kingdom
United States
Canada
France
Question 18. 18. Which criteria for payment of health care typically results in wealthier, younger, and healthier individuals paying disproportionately to finance the care of poorer, older, and sicker individuals?
Actuarial principles
Ability-to-pay criteria
Estimated risk
Random selection
Question 19. 19. Which of the following are characteristics of the medical model? Select all that apply.
Is reductionistic
Focuses on determinants of health
Is concerned with disease diagnosis
Emphasizes defining the cellular mechanisms
Takes into account the social and economic environment
Question 20. 20. Which country is currently concerned that it may have an oversupply of doctors and nurses?
United Kingdom
United States
France
Question 21. 21. Medicaid and CHIP eligibility criteria are based primarily on which of the following?
Gender
Income
Employment
Question 22. 22. Among health care programs in the U.S., which is the best example of socialized medicine?
Veterans hospital administration
Medicare
Medicaid
Question 23. 23. Which of the following countries have national health insurance systems, which are modelled after the one designed by Bismarck? Select all that apply.
Switzerland
Canada
Sweden
France
United States
Question 24. 24. By the end of 2013, about half of physician payments to health care providers in China came from which of the following?
Straight salary
Combination of capitation payment and fee-for-service
Fee-for-service
Capitation payment
Question 25. 25. Which of the following is the single most important modifiable cause of poor pregnancy outcomes?
Alcohol abuse
Smoking
Excessive exercise
Unhealthy diet
Question 26. 26. Although the states have constitutional authority to implement public health, federal laws pertaining to public health can supersede state laws. This is known as which of the following?
Promotion
Assurance
Preemption
Assessment
Question 27. 27. Which of the following essential public health services would be considered related to policy development? Select all that apply.
Inform, educate, and empower people about health issues.
Mobilize community partnerships to identify and solve health problems.
Monitor health status to identify community health problems.
Develop policies and plans that support individual and community health efforts.
Enforce laws and regulations that protect health and ensure safety.
Question 28. 28. A water aerobics class specifically designed for clients with osteoarthritis, to help restore them to their highest level of functioning and minimize negative impacts of this disease, is an example of which of the following?
Health promotion
Primary prevention
Secondary prevention
Tertiary prevention
Question 29. 29. An ad campaign that stresses the importance of wearing a seatbelt when driving or riding in a car is an example of which of the following?
Health promotion
Universal prevention
Targeted prevention
Social justice
Question 30. 30. Which of the following causes more preventable deaths and diseases than any other behavioral risk factor?
Cardiovascular disease
Tobacco use
Breast cancer
Question 31. 31. Which of the following are the four leading behavioral risk factors that lead to death? Select all that apply.
Tobacco use
Unprotected sex
Alcohol abuse
Lack of seatbelt use
Sedentary lifestyle
Unhealthy diet
Question 32. 32. Which of the following are true of public health institutes? Select all that apply.
Part of state governments
Can advocate for public health programs and funding
May accept private funds
Offer a credible, neutral, third-party voice
Question 33. 33. Even with the Affordable Care Act in place, approximately how many people currently residing in the U.S. are expected to remain without health insurance?
12 million
24 million
36 million
48 million
Question 34. 34. Your mother complains because she has to drive "all over town" to various doctors and specialists to manage her health, which requires that she take several days off from work instead of just one. This barrier to her health care is known as which of the following?
Fragmentation
Silo structures
Volume-driven system
Reactive care
Question 35. 35. Job loss is a significant source of stress and is associated with increased risk for which of the following poor health outcomes? Select all that apply.
Heart attack
Stroke
Diabetes
Depression
Question 36. 36. Which of the following are the core providers to America's sickest, poorest, and most vulnerable populations?
Public hospitals
Community health clinics
Physicians in private practice
Private hospitals
Question 37. 37. According to the 2010 National Health Interview Survey, approximately what percentage of U.S. adults had two to three concurrent chronic conditions?
Question 38. 38. In 2030, when the entire baby boom generation will have turned 65, seniors will make up approximately what proportion of the population?
One fifth
One fourth
One third
One half
Question 39. 39. Which of the following is the best example of a social health need?
Bipolar disorder
Blindness
Homelessness
Question 40. 40. Mark, a friend of yours, has recently begun talking about quitting smoking. He has spoken with his doctor and is gathering information from some of his friends who have successfully quit. He plans on actually quitting in about 3 months, right after the holiday season. Which stage of the stages-of-change model of health behavior change is Mark currently in?
Precontemplation
Contemplation
Preparation
Action
2.  Keeping people healthy, Protecting the environment, Making sure water supplies are safe, Ensuring that a community has a safe place for people to be physically active
8. 17.2% (you can round it up to 20 or round down to 15%, but 17.2% is the correct amount as of 2011)
This solution identifies the correct answer for a range of questions on healthcare issues.