In a recent conference on counter-terrorism held in Netanya, Israel, world-renowned terrorism expert Steven Emerson said, “Hamas was founded in the United States years before it emerged in Gaza in 1987.”
Influenced by the Islamic theology and politics of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood, a Muslim student group known as the Muslim Student Association (MSA) was founded in the United States in 1963.  The MSA was considered by terrorism experts to be the “mother” of the Muslim Brotherhood in the US.  The Muslim Brotherhood charter includes in part, “Allah is our objective, the prophet (Muhammad) is our leader, the Koran is our law, Jihad (armed struggle) is our way, dying in the way of Allah is our highest hope.”
Published transcripts of Muslim Brotherhood meetings state their plans to infiltrate and annihilate secular governments in North America and Europe.  “The brotherhood must understand that their work in America is a kind of grand Jihad in eliminating and destroying the western civilization from within.  So that it is eliminated and god’s (Allah’s) religion is made victorious over all other religions.”
A young rising star of the Muslim Brotherhood, MOUSA MOHAMMED ABU MARZUK, arrived in the United States in 1981 and founded the Islamic Association for Palestine (IAP) in North America.  The IAP was the American face of the terrorist group later to be known as Hamas.  The leadership of the IAP recruited and trained young American Muslims who would later detonate themselves on the streets of Tel Aviv and Jerusalem slaughtering hundreds of Israeli citizens.  Hamas began in 1981, but did not emerge in Israel until 1987.
Stephen Emerson said at the Netanya conference this past week that the “founding of the IAP was the real founding of Hamas.”  Official US Immigration reports stated in 2001 that the IAP was responsible for “publishing and distributing Hamas communiqués printed on IAP letterhead, as well as other written documentation to include the Hamas charter and glory records (lists of terrorist attacks carried out by Hamas against Israeli civilians).”
Mr. Emerson went on to say that Hamas continues to be very active in the United States and is funded primarily by a front organization known as the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR).  CAIR has been recently named as an “un-indicted co-conspirator” in the terrorist funding case against the Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development. According to Steven Emerson, “four leading members of CAIR have been deported or convicted for terrorism.”
Hamas is currently waging war against the Israeli people from their power base in the Gaza Strip.  Hamas leader Nizhar Riyah shouted on May 21, 2007, “Hamas is determined to wipe Israel of the map and replace it with the state of Palestine.  We will persevere until the last Jew is expelled!”  Hamas is politically poised to become the first official Muslim Brotherhood state and they were founded in the United States and are being funded and legitimized by one of many Muslim civil rights groups in the US known as CAIR.
As an internationally recognized authority on terrorism networks who has briefed the US congress dozens of times, Steven Emerson suggested one tactic to undermine Hamas, he said, “Quit empowering terrorists!  We (the US) should begin the act of dismantling these organizations, begin the act of discrediting them and stop legitimizing these political human rights groups that are essentially surrogates for the Muslim Brotherhood.”