Thousands took to the streets of Gaza this week to mourn the death of the co-founder of Hamas, who was buried with an assault rifle across his chest.
Hammad Al-Hasanat co-founded the terrorist group on December 14, 1987, with its spiritual leader Sheikh Ahmad Yassin.
He was 80 years old when he died on Monday from health complications.
Hammad Al-Hasanat (pictured) co-founded the terrorist group on December 14, 1987, with its spiritual leader Sheikh Ahmad Yassin
The UK, Australia, Canada, Israel, Japan and the United States consider Hamas to be a terrorist organisation
Thousands took to the streets of Gaza this week to mourn the death of Hammad Al-Hasanat
Pictures of his funeral in the Nuseirat refugee camp show armed Islamic militants carrying Al-Hasanat on stretcher through the streets.
Hamas' Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh said in a statement that Hassanat 'was a brilliant leader of the Islamic movement, and one of the founders of the Muslim Brotherhood and the Hamas movement in Palestine'.
The UK, Australia, Canada, Israel, Japan and the United States consider Hamas to be a terrorist organisation, while Iran, Russia, Turkey, China and Qatar consider it to be a legitimate political organisation.
Hamas' Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh said in a statement that Hassanat 'was a brilliant leader of the Islamic movement'
Hamas has held sway in Gaza since 2007.
Israel said on Monday it has busted an Israeli-Palestinian smuggling ring that funneled iron, electronic equipment and other prohibited materials to Gaza, bypassing Israel's stringent border security to help Hamas rebuild its militant infrastructure following last year's war.
Nine people in the ring, among them three Jewish Israelis who own companies that sell the materials, were charged with assisting an enemy in wartime, terror financing and fraud.
The remaining ring members were said to be Palestinians from Gaza.
Hamas, a bitter enemy of Israel's, suffered heavy losses in the 50-day war, in which Israel carried out some 5,000 airstrikes throughout Gaza. Hamas fired thousands of rockets into Israel. The fighting killed more than 2,200 Palestinians and 72 people on the Israeli side.
Hamas is suffering from international isolation and a cash crunch and has been trying to rebuild the coastal territory since the fighting ended.