Health in Ireland Key Trends gives us insights into trends in demographics, population health, hospital and primary care and health service employment and expenditure.
The presentation of trend data over the last decade in the 2015 report highlights the many significant achievements that Ireland has made in terms of key outcomes relating to the health and wellbeing of the population. However, it also highlights the challenges that persist in terms of the accessibility of timely healthcare and in the context of financial constraints.
In the last decade alone, there has been an increase of two and a half years in life expectancy. These gains are driven largely by reductions in mortality rates from principal causes of deaths such as those from heart disease and cancer.
Another striking feature is the growth in the number of people aged over 65. Each year this cohort increases by 20,000 people. This trend is set to continue into the future and will have implications for future planning and health service delivery. Ireland will see the largest proportional increases in the population aged 85 years and older.
Ageing of the population in conjunction with lifestyle-related health threats continue to present major challenges now and into the future in sustaining and further improving health and health services in Ireland. Although difficult to quantify, the contribution of modern health services to these improvements in health outcomes and in life expectancy have been significant.
Ireland’s fertility rates are still among the highest in Europe but the birth rate has fallen to its lowest rate for the last decade.  However, Ireland currently has the highest proportion of children and young people in our population among EU countries.
The first Healthy Ireland survey was published in October and a selection of results highlighting the main determinants of health are included in this publication. This survey along with results from future waves will provide policy makers and stakeholders with valuable information about the health status of the Irish population.
While there are fewer inpatient hospital beds than a decade ago, there has been a 41% increase in day beds and a shorter length of stay. This shows Ireland is using its capacity more efficiently.
This year, for the first year since 2007, the numbers employed in the public health service have increased with the numbers of employees increasing across all grade categories.
This is the eighth edition of this easy-to-use reference guide to significant trends in health and health care over the past decade, including population and health status, as well as trends in service provision. This year, new tables, maps and graphs have been included on some specific topics or where new data has been made available. Each section has a brief introduction summarising key statistics.
Further key trends, by section of the booklet, are presented below:
Section 1 – Population and Life Expectancy
Chapter 2 – Health of the Population
Please note that any references below to 2013 and 2014 mortality data should be considered provisional, as 2013 and 2014 data in this report are based on year of registration, and not year of occurrence.
Also note that because of a change in statistical methods due to the implementation of the new European standard population, the age standardised mortality rates in Key Trends 2015 are not comparable with those stated in previous years, versions of Key Trends. For information on the change in methods see the Statistics section of the Department of Health website.
Chapter 4 – Primary Care and Community Services
Chapter 5 – Health Service Employment
Chapter 6 – Health Service Expenditure