When Prometheus brought the gift of fire to mankind, he may have gotten it from Exxon (NYSE:XOM), a company supplying energy to those that need it for a very long time. With XOM share price reaching an all time peak of $104.76 just 3 months ago and still trading at a price higher than any time since July 2013, many pundits have suggested the company is over priced at present. Looking at collapsing oil prices, hostile political environments at home and around the world and rising competition from alternate resources, there is much to suggest that these pundits are correct. I am here to tell you that they are wrong. At the close of market Friday, November 7th, Exxon shares were bargain priced at $96.59, 16.63% below their current fair value price for income investors.
Exxon traces its roots back to the Standard Oil Company of Ohio, founded in 1870. Its roots in the oil business predate the automobile. It has seen its original world of kerosene and whale oil vanish from being sought after global commodities for heating, lighting, and lubricants to transform into a world of gasoline, nuclear energy, vast coal fired and hydro electric plants, solar energy, fuel cells, and every other technological alternative that man has been able to dream of. The company has weathered 2 world wars, 100s of regional wars, global pandemics such as the 1918 flu which killed over 40 million people. Its assets have come under direct attack by nationalizations, revolutions, sovereign confiscations, taxation, and outright theft. Laws have been passed to break it (The Standard Oil Companies) up and it has risen from the ashes stronger each time. It has been displaced as the largest company in the world and biggest oil producer to become a second tier player behind the current mega-giant National Oil Companies that dominate world reserves and production now. And yet, through all of this the company has thrived and its investors have thrived along with it. Exxon is a keyholder to that exclusive 8 member club of The Dividend Zombies.
Each Zombie has a history of over 100 years paying unbroken and undiminished dividends. Why would you not have such a company in your portfolio? Why would you not be adding to your position at this bargain price below fair value? You won't miss out on this opportunity once you've finished reading this article.
My earlier Zombie articles tell you exactly why all 8 of them belong at the core of every income investor's portfolio and have an excellent place in the core of all portfolios. Exxon Mobil has been trampling on other's graves since the 1870 founding of Standard Oil of Ohio, its originator. The company has been paying unbroken and uncut dividends since 1882. Current yield is 3% and the 5 year total return is 142%.
Do you really want to buy an oil company in this market?
Exxon has added new reserves that replace more than 100% of its annual production in each of the past 20 years. With a total of over 25.02 Billion barrels of oil equivalent [BOE] and a current annual production rate of 1.553 Billion BOE, the company could continue producing for more than the next 15 years without investing another dime in exploration and leasing. The current cyclic downturn in hydrocarbon prices has been seen dozens of times by Exxon and will have no substantive impact on its long term forward prospects nor any impact at all on its dividend program. Finally, as Palmeri and Jalvers put it while writing for BloombergBusinessweek Magazine, "Exxon pumps cash, not oil."
I am not going to give you an analysis of the supply/demand and price outlook for oil for the next decade, nor a full cycle cost breakdown for Exxon, or even a lifting cost. I will be presenting that stuff and more in a future article on the oil business and outlook. But today we are looking at XOM as a Zombie, a proven survivor in sending monthly cash to your account.
There are many methodologies and sources for evaluating a global name in energy like Exxon Mobil. I have selected those that I think help to explore its reliability, consistency, future prospects, and fair value price.
There are many professionals out there that offer their appraisal of a company's prospects. The list includes analysts, brokerage firms, financing consortiums, traditional mutual funds, ETF and hedge managers, and major investors like Soros, Icahn, even the equity firms such as Blackstone. Many of these have no skin in the game at all. The most any of these has is merely billions of dollars at stake.
Most important among professional appraisers are the rating agencies. A ratings firm has its chief asset, its entire credibility, on the line when it gives an appraisal. I value Moody's, the undisputed world leader among rating agencies, in appraising companies and their creditworthiness.
Reading a Moody's opinion tells you far more than if a company is likely to be able to pay back its lenders. A Moody's analysis examines the very soul of a company. Here's what it had to say about Exxon in its May 13, 2014 Credit report;
ExxonMobil is the only integrated oil company rated Aaa among a group of highly rated peers (i.e. Chevron, Royal Dutch Shell, and Total), and one of three industrial Aaa companies.
What more can I say except WOW. But Moody's goes on to say much more in their latest report of November 5, 2014;
Despite the recent sharp decline in oil prices, the CDS-, EDF™- and bond-implied ratings for Exxon all were stable over the last 90 days. We believe Exxon's unique, highly-rated credit status has dampened the impact on the company of the drop in oil prices globally. Exxon has reaffirmed its flexibility by indicating it will be deferring plans to expand in some areas and reducing exposures to those businesses with the weakest profit margins, while at the same time signaling plans to boost output by 2017.
When a rating agency speaks in superlatives, it's time to sit up and take notice;
Addressing the reasons it rates XOM as solidly as it can,
The rating reflects its differentially strong position in oil and gas reserves and production, coupled with conservative financial metrics. ExxonMobil is also one of the world's largest petroleum refiners and petrochemical producers. Because of the scale of its upstream business, ExxonMobil is challenged each year to replace the reserves that are produced, which often requires larger projects, longer development cycles and significant up-front investment. The long term investment cycle exposes the company's return on investment to certain risks including commodity price volatility.
The company maintains a strong balance sheet with low leverage providing financial flexibility throughout the industry cycles. Total debt including Moody's adjustments was about $63 billion at year end 2013 compared to about $80 billion of EBITDA for the year. Leverage, as measured by gross debt to total proved reserves was about $2.50 per Boe, lower than all of its Aa1 peers.
Any questions? In an industrial sector made up of giants, Moody's tells us that Exxon is the elephant in the room. The only debate is whether this one is immortal due to its god-like financial metrics or its long history of zombie tenacity.
Confident that XOM has the long history of a proven survivor and forward prospects remain golden in Moody's outlook, we next examine its internal trends using traditional value metrics.
Historical P/E ratios for Exxon show that at the current 12.1 ratio, it is below its long average 14.0 P/E and remains below the historical P/E ratios it has traded in for most of the past 30+ years. Based on this widely used valuation metric, XOM shares are at a rare bargain price. Contrasted with a current 12.15 P/E, a ratio of 16.0 near the upper channel limit to the trends indicates that shares could trade as high as $127.20 and still be considered within fair value range. A likely easing of forward earnings for the short term due to lower oil prices and curtailment of some activity makes this upper limit to fair value one to be considered with caution at present.
A comparison of competitor P/Es also affirms the internal metric fair values. Exxon's current P/E is solidly at industry average, with little variation among the peer group.
(click to enlarge) (source: yahoo.com)Click to enlarge
YDP is a powerful analysis tool for dividend income equities. The simple mathematical formula Y=D/P defines the correlated relationship between Distributions, which are set by the company); Price, which is simply the market place setting a value for those distributions as buyers and sellers interact such that the dynamic supply and demand of shares is balanced by the amount those groups are willing to trade at. The result is Yield, simply the distribution divided by price. Yield is a generally accepted method for income investors to compare income investment opportunities. Risk weighted yield (in an ideal world) thus becomes the fungible currency for the exchange of all income investments. Those of equal risk will have the same yield rate, greater risk proportionally demands greater yield and conversely for lower risk. YDP trends reveal the historical balancing of these market forces in arriving at the investor driven yield result for any given equity shares. For a more complete discussion of the theory and application, see my SeekingAlpha blog on YDP Chart Analysis & Value Appraisal - Theory & Description.
A YDP analysis of Exxon Mobil shows the market place has established a 2.45% long term yield rate trend, making the current 2.90% yield attractive for income investors looking at this Zombie. YDP analysis suggests we can expect a return to the 2.45% yield over time. Fair value at this rate would be $112.65, 16.63% above Friday's $96.59 close. A $0.12 increase on the annual dividend (1/2 the size of the annual increases in recent years) would indicate a YDP fair value price of $117.55, a 21.7% premium over Friday's close.
Dividend payout ratios are near all-time lows but cash dividend payout ratios have risen sharply the past couple of years. The cash dividend payout ratio is still well within its long-term range. For the past few years, Exxon has been borrowing to pay its dividend and fund its aggressive share buy-back program. Exxon has already announced plans to scale back exploration expenditures for 2015 and will tailor overall expenditures to adjust to internal and macro economic conditions. These short-term adjustments insure prudent management of financial metrics while having no real impact on the company's long-term performance.
Technical analysis of price trend history can help place fair value price into context of share volatility and risk ranges by identifying momentum channels and levels of support and resistance. Looking at the chart for Exxon we see a messy pattern of strong and broad rising channels punctuated by steep declines. The resistance at $104.70, repeatedly tested from the first week of May through the end of July, is likely to remain a top so long as oil prices remain weak. The low of $86.91 at the bottom of the recent market correction may very well not be the lowest point moving ahead in the environment of soft oil, a world of brittle economic growth, and the always looming potential for disaster news linked to oil spills, revolutions, and other mishaps which will arise from time to time for a global oil company like Exxon.
(click to enlarge) (source: yahoo.com mod. by author)Click to enlarge
If you have a sense of perspective, this chart has to make you laugh. A company like XOM repeatedly trading in 15%+ swings over periods of weeks is someone's idea of a joke. This is one of the six SuperMajors, a Zombie with roots 144 years old and a dividend death stare tracing back 132 years. Volatility like this for such a company is sheer nonsense. It is evidence of the irrational folly markets can succumb to and the calculated mechanical order execution seen in some key stocks.
My take-aways from this technical look highlight that investors can expect high volatility, sudden trend reversals and annual price swings of 30% or more. These are not negatives for a zombie and can be converted to a wise investor's advantage. You need to be aware of these patterns and prepared to accept and even embrace them however.
Covered Option Writing To Boost Yield and Decrease Market Risk:
Far from making you shy away, this high volatility, the flash crashes and wide gyrations are great news to an income investor using covered option writing to boost yield. Not only will those options lower your market risk and raise your yield, as an option writer, volatility is your friend, increasing premium yields.
For the investor with a long-term focus, be it income, growth, or a blend, covered options offer a wide range of opportunities to participate in Exxon Mobil right now. For investors looking to wait for a pullback, Cash Covered Put writing can pay you much better yield rates on your covering cash than prevailing demand deposit yields, and more than the dividend yield of XOM itself.
Current owners of Exxon Mobil should consider selling the 1/17/2015 $100 Covered Call with $1.10 premium. This 69-day contract gives you $110.00/contract immediate cash in pocket. The premium is an absolute boost of 1.14% (6.02% annualized yield rate) onto the current $96.59 share price. The $1.10 adds 39.86% to the $2.76 dividend. Extrapolating to an annualized rate, the $1.10 on the 69-day contract converts to $5.82 for 365 day coverage. This is more than double the dividend itself, raising the total combined distributions annualized rate to $8.58 (an 8.8% yield rate). This is a 3X boost over the dividend alone.
Readers often ask about the "risk" of writing covered calls. This trade provides an excellent example of the opportunity risk. There is no chance that you will lose any money out of pocket by writing this contract (assuming your costs basis for your shares is below $98.90). If the shares are called away from you then you received $100 per share at that time plus the $1.10 you already have been paid for simply writing the covered call - a total return of $101.10. This contrasts with the $96.59 share price at the time the contract is written, a gain of $4.51. This is a trader's absolute gain on the $95.49 risk exposure (remember you have the $1.10 decreasing your basis exposure for the period below the $96.59) for an absolute return on risked capital of 1.05%. Annualized from 69 days of the contract to a full 365 day year this is a yield rate of 25.0% (before compounding). Clearly, in call-away scenario, your 25% annualized yield rate is far greater than the combined dividend + capital gain growth you expect on average from holding the XOM shares. In the case that the stock plunges deeply, you are at a loss on paper. But paper losses are like paper gains, they mean nothing. Since you are holding the shares for long term and have no plan to sell them even on extreme market swings, any such plunge during the contract is of no importance or effect to you at all. You still have gained the $1.10 on the 69 day lock up of your shares by simply sitting and doing what you would have done without the $1.10 anyway. The upside opportunity risk you are exposed to is that the shares are called away from you for the $100 and still rise beyond your $101.10 total payments. To get back in, you may have to pay more than the $101.10. There are many alternate strategies that make this issue of no importance. You can buy the $100 calls to close out your contracts and end the call-away risk at any time during the 69 days. You can have your shares called and then write Cash Covered Puts to obtain a good yield while waiting to buy back into the shares (or into an alternate equivalent ticker). You can buy back into shares at the higher price, selling covered calls to recoup the difference of your exit price and new entry cost. In no case have you been exposed to any out of pocket loss, only to the potential lost opportunity of making even more money on the shares if they do advance strongly over the 69 days. And you are paid handsomely for selling some of that upside opportunity.
Buyers looking to establish a new position in Exxon Mobil should consider 3 alternate strategies:
A) Buy shares at market and concurrently write the 1/17/2015 $100.00 Covered Call with $1.10 premium as described above for current owners. The shares are about a 50/50 chance of reaching $100 within the 13 days remaining on the contract. The actual order should be entered as a buy-write order with a net debit of $95.49 per share. This will minimize your transaction costs and insure you are buying your shares and selling your covered calls, avoiding the need to buy shares first and risk not selling the calls at the planned or acceptable premiums.
B) Write the 1/17/2015 $95.00 Cash Covered Put with premium of $2.00. This strategy is of interest to those that believe further price decline is likely sooner or later and they wish a lower basis or are willing to let the stock rise out of their target for a period while getting paid cash premiums to wait for the targeted pull back. In the event the shares remain above $95.00 for the 69-day contract period, you will have an absolute return of 2.15%, an annualized yield rate of 11.34% as interest on your covering cash while you are waiting.
C) Write the 11/22/14 $99.00 Cash Covered Put with premium of $2.73. This close in the money Strike has about a 75% chance of being presented to you. If so, your adjusted basis is lowered to $96.27, a 0.33% absolute discount (9.3% annualized rate) from current market price over the brief 13-day contract. On the other hand, should shares sustain an advance over the current $96.59 market within the next 13 days, the $2.73 premium is a rich reward, giving you an absolute return of on your covering cash 2.84% (annualized 79.62% yield rate on your covering cash). As you can see, yield rates can be extreme, far more than you probably dream of making over a year on your most wildly speculative high risk investments. Yet, the covered option writing actually lowers market risk and has no risk of actual loss for income investors using strike prices they are willing to own the shares long term at anyway.
Current Exxon Mobil owners wishing to sell should consider the 11/22/2014 $96.00 Covered Call with $1.50 premium. This short term, 13 day, in the money contract will likely give you an exit for a total $97.50, a 0.94% absolute boost over the Friday closing market price. You remain ahead of the game even if share prices fall out of the money below $96.00 for the next two weeks so long as you liquidate at or above $95.09, a 1.55% decline within that time.
(click to enlarge) (source: schwab.com)Click to enlarge
All options are best traded in tax preference accounts (IRA, Roth, etc). Always be aware of possible tax consequences of call-away and possible wash rules if you are using option writing outside tax preference accounts. Keep ex-dividend dates in mind when selection contract expirations and consider the impact of dividend capture on your premiums when your contracts will span dividend periods.
Survey of potential interest in a Zombie ETF:
Because the Zombies have a place in the core holdings of everyone's portfolio, many people have indicated an interest in an ETF or investment club to make it simple and minimize transaction costs and expenses. If you have such an interest then please message me. This is not a solicitation nor offer for such a fund or investment club. It is only a feasibility survey of interest to see if further exploration is merited.
Become an instant alert follower to be sure to get notice of all my latest analysis and income yield boost articles as they are released. You can follow this link to my other articles, most of which include covered option strategies. If you wish to receive notices of my future articles (or real time alerts as they publish), simply hover your cursor over the "FOLLOW" to the right of my picture at the top of this article or select the options in the author box shown below at the end of this article.
I am not a licensed securities dealer or advisor. The views here are solely my own and should not be considered or used for investment advice. As always, individuals should determine the suitability for their own situation and perform their own due diligence before making any investment.
Disclosure: The author has no positions in any stocks mentioned, and no plans to initiate any positions within the next 72 hours.
The author wrote this article themselves, and it expresses their own opinions. The author is not receiving compensation for it (other than from Seeking Alpha). The author has no business relationship with any company whose stock is mentioned in this article.