Trafficking is an issue for all local authorities but is more prominent where there are major ports of entry.
The 'trafficking' of children is a complex issue with no one-size-fits-all response and is often linked to people smuggling, 'facilitation' and private fostering. Trafficking is an international issue which requires a co-ordinated response across a number of agencies.
No, young people can be trafficked from within the UK as well as from overseas and are trafficked out of as well as into the UK. Sometimes young people are also trafficked in the company of family members or adults which can make this a difficult crime to identify.
Young people can be trafficked for a number of reasons and there is no simple answer to this question. Trafficking of children includes exploitation, which can range from unpaid domestic service (including within their own families), benefit fraud, or employment below minimum wage with no access to schooling; through to trafficking for the sex industry and other criminal activities.
It is a co-ordinated effort from a number of agencies. The first agency that young people come into contact with on their arrival into the UK is the UKBA who make the initial decisions and refer young people to the local authority where necessary. Local authorities work closely with partner agencies through the Local Safeguarding Children Board to put in place arrangements to combat trafficking. This includes the prevention and deterrence of trafficking through co-ordinated overseas and point of entry policing activity (including action by immigration services, law enforcement agencies, airport authorities, and overseas embassies).
A challenge, particularly for port-of-entry authorities, which have large numbers of unaccompanied minors, is identifying those who are at risk of trafficking. First and foremost, they are children so are placed in appropriate accommodation, residential care and foster care appropriate to their individual needs. Local authorities do not have the statutory powers to place children in more secure settings and even if they did, the effectiveness of such arrangements would be questionable, as the traffickers will wait for the completion of the detention period. These young people cannot be locked up even for their own safety, but staff talk frankly with them and advise them to stay rather than leave and potentially put themselves in danger. Only a court can enforce a more secure set up and it requires a high level of evidence to deprive children of their liberty.
No, children and young people referred to Hillingdon could be unaccompanied without being trafficked. Hillingdon Council has a duty to care for any minor who requires looking after and therefore any unaccompanied young person would be referred to the council.
Hillingdon works with the young people in terms of managing their risk at point of entry into the UK; engaging with the young person about potential risks and also managing their contact with strangers. Trafficking is a relatively newly identified challenge for all agencies both locally, nationally, and internationally with examples of good practice across all agencies, and we keep under review trends and share best practice.
A multi-agency, fortnightly operational meeting is held to discuss the risks and needs of all children arriving at the airport in the previous two weeks. This enables key information and intelligence to be shared, and protective measures to be applied to those children most at risk.
An unaccompanied asylum seeking child is a young person who is separated from both parents, is not being cared for by an adult and is applying for asylum in their own right, under the relevant legislation.
The UKBA is the first organisation which deals with the young person when they arrive at Heathrow and will do an initial assessment on the child. The UKBA makes the decision which young people are to be referred to the local authority.
Young people are assessed in terms of their age and need. A young person believed to be under the age of 16 would be taken care of in one of the local authority's children's homes. A young person believed to be over the age of 16 would be referred to one of the local authority's assessment centres where their care needs would be assessed. The local authority can in some cases have a duty of care for young people up until the age of 24 depending on their circumstances and need.
No, not all do. Some do at the point of entry and some do after they enter the country. However, some young people never seek asylum after they enter the country and could, for example, simply have come for a holiday or to study.
Hillingdon is provided with limited funding from the Home Office, but the amount of funding is not sufficient for the numbers of young people it cares for due to its position in relation to Heathrow. Last year, Hillingdon had a shortfall of approximately £2m and has in the past lobbied government to recognise the concern of the local authority and agree that funding should be needs based, rather than per capita to ensure these costs are recoverable. As this is a national issue, Hillingdon have been working with other port authorities to agree a funding structure which does not have to be covered by local council tax payers.
The numbers and nationalities of trafficked young people varies over time. In most years there are more than 20 nationalities represented among potential victims of trafficking but not all young people are trafficked from abroad and arrive at Heathrow Airport.
The numbers of unaccompanied asylum seeking children (UASC) varies over time and is collated on entry by the UK Border Agency.
It is not unusual for children in care, or local authority accommodation to be absent, and not return at agreed times. Due to their vulnerability and as a precautionary measure, all such occurrences are reported to the police.
It is very rare that children go missing and don't return at all. They are usually found elsewhere or return within 48 hours.
In this current year, 2013-2014, there are two young people who have gone missing, and reported formally as still missing. Both of these are 17 years of age.
In 2012-2013, eight young people went missing between 16 -18 years of age, but five of these have come to notice subsequently as adults.
This information is collated by the police.
Young people who are being trafficked do sometimes go missing, and are reported to the police. Last year, 2011-2012, there were four young people who went missing, who were believed to be trafficked.
This information is collated by the police.
Usually children and young people go missing because they have been instructed to do so by adults who have arranged and organised their entry into the UK. Threats, coercion, and promises of a better life motivate children and young people to abscond. Often children and young people do not know the real reason that they have been brought to the UK and do not realise they are in danger.
The London Borough of Hillingdon has been very successful at reducing the numbers of children and young people absconding. This has been achieved by providing a 24/7 response service that engages with children and young people as soon as they are referred.
In order to prevent children and young people absconding, the local authority works hard to help them to understand the dangers of trafficking and encourages them to choose to stay put.
Hillingdon staff use the trafficking toolkit as a means of identifying potential victims of trafficking, and a referral is then made to the UK Human Trafficking Centre [UKHTC] via the National Referral Mechanism [NRM], which came into effect in April 2009. Since that Hillingdon has made the following number of referrals.