BlackRock (“We/BlackRock”) recognizes the importance of protecting your personal and financial information when you visit our websites (each a “Website” and together “Websites”). This Policy including the Cookies Policy is designed to help you understand the information collection practices on all Websites owned or operated by or on behalf of companies within the BlackRock group of companies, including (but not limited to) blackrock.com and ishares.com, together with their local variations (for example, blackrock.co.uk; blackrock.com/de etc). Information collected on our Websites is collected by BlackRock Investment Management UK Limited. Contact information is included in this Policy and on the Website.
(a)   protecting the personal data you provide to us;
(b)   telling you how we use the information we gather about you; and
(c)   ensuring that you know the circumstances under which we may disclose your personal data.
This Policy covers the privacy and data protection policies on our website, and should be read in conjunction with any other applicable policies, terms, and conditions in place between you and BlackRock.
This Policy is dated 1st July 2016.
Previous versions of this Policy are available upon request. BlackRock reserves the right to amend this Privacy Policy at any time without notice, by updating this posting, in which case the date of the Policy will be revised. However, you will be asked to provide your consent to updated versions of this Policy in the event of a material change to the information contained within it. In addition, you will be asked to reaffirm your consent to this Policy on a periodic basis. The current version of this Policy can be accessed from the link on the homepage, or at the bottom of our other website pages. By accessing the Website following amendments, you are accepting the amended Policy.
If you have any questions about this Policy, or our privacy related practices, please contact us:
The personal data and other information you submit to our Websites is used to service your account, to improve our services to you and/or to provide you with information on BlackRock products and services. The types of personal data that may be collected at our Websites include: name, address, email address and telephone number. We will not sell, share or rent your personal data to others in contravention of this Privacy Policy.
Additionally, if you are accessing parts of this Website that are password protected, then once you submit your password and enter, this Website will recognize who you are and collect all information that you submit, including all electronic information (including all transaction information).
In the password protected section of our Website, or if you are a visitor who has entered the Website via a click through link in an email which we have sent you, information about you, including information about the pages you visit, the documents you download and other information which can help us personalize our future interaction with you may be collected. Any information collected about you from this Website may be associated with other identifying information that we have about you.
Where you would like to receive a copy of all personal data held, such request should be in writing (email or post), addressed to our Global Privacy Officer at our London Office and should contain as much information as possible to facilitate our dealing with this request.
We generally record certain usage information, such as the number and frequency of visitors to our Websites. This information may include the websites that you access immediately before and after your visit to our Websites, the Internet browser you are using and your IP address. If we use such data at all it will be on an aggregate basis, and we will not disclose to third parties any information that could be used to identify you personally.
Sharing your information with other BlackRock companies and Service Providers
Your personal data may be collected and processed for the purposes above:
(i) By any of the companies within the BlackRock group; or
(ii) By a third party service provider engaged by us for these purposes;
BlackRock companies and service providers we engage may be based in countries outside of the European Union / EEA in countries having different standards of protection for personal data. Recipients will be required by us to protect your information in accordance with applicable data protection laws.
Your personal data will be held and processed by us in accordance with applicable data protection law.
We will not provide any personal data to any other persons, except if we are required to make disclosures by any law, any government or private parties in connection with a lawsuit, subpoena, investigation or similar proceeding.
BlackRock does not sell its customers' personal data, nor will we provide your personal data to third parties for their marketing purposes without your consent. BlackRock will not send you e-mail messages without first receiving your permission, unless it relates to servicing your account or unless you have consented to receiving electronic delivery of fund documents as part of our E-Delivery service. It is our policy to include instructions for unsubscribing from these permission-based programs.
If the business, stock or assets of BlackRock are acquired or merged with another business entity, we will share all or some of your information with this entity to continue to provide our service to you. You will receive notice of such an event and the new entity will inform you of any changes to the practices in this Privacy Policy. If the new entity wishes to make additional use of your information, you may decline such use at such time.
The personal data you provide to us will only be disclosed to third parties if we have your permission, or as set out in this Privacy Policy. We may disclose details about the general use of our Websites to third parties – for example, to demonstrate patterns of use to advertisers and other business partners. Information we pass on for this purpose will not include any personal data by which you may be identified. We endeavour to prevent unauthorised disclosures of your personal data by third parties but we are not responsible for any unauthorised disclosures or other breaches of security or for the actions of others if the information was passed to them with your authority or with the authority of anyone other than us or our group companies.
BlackRock disclaims responsibility for the privacy policies and customer information practices of third party internet websites hyperlinked from our Website or this Privacy Policy.
We recommend that you do not send us any personal data via non secure methods of correspondence, including via public electronic communication channels, such as Internet e-mail, which are generally not secure.
BlackRock protects your personal data when you transact business on our Website by requiring the use of a browser software program that supports industry standard SSL encryption with 128-bit key lengths. The "128-bit" designation refers to the length of the key used to encrypt the data being transmitted, with a longer key representing a higher level of security.
Cookies are small text files that are stored in your computer’s memory and hard drive, in your mobile device or tablet when you visit certain web pages. They are used to enable websites to function or to provide information to the owners of a website, or other third parties which receive data obtained from that website.
When you visit any web site, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalised web experience.
Cookies help us to provide customised services and information. We use cookies on all our Websites to tell us, in general terms, how and when pages in our Websites are visited, what our users’ technology preferences are – such as what type of video player they use – and whether our Websites are functioning properly. Depending on their purpose, some cookies will only operate for the length of a single browsing session, whilst others have a longer life span to ensure that they fulfil their longer-term purposes (as explained in more detail below). Please note that, however long the cookies’ active life may be, you can delete cookies (and therefore stop any further data collection by them) as further described below.
If you are using one of our password-protected sites, then the Website may use cookies or other technology to help us authenticate you, store and recognise your configuration and user attributes, facilitate your navigation of the website and customise its content so that the information made available is likely to be of more interest to you.
In broad terms, we use cookies on our Websites for the following purposes:
• Analytical purposes: Analytical cookies allow us to recognise, measure and track visitors to our Websites and compile a record of this usage information. This helps us to improve and develop the way our Websites work, for example, by determining whether site visitors can find information easily, or by identifying the aspects of websites that are of the most interest to them.
• Usage preferences: Some of the cookies on our Websites are activated when visitors to our sites make a choice about their usage of the site. Our Websites then ‘remember’ the settings preferences of the user concerned. This allows us to tailor aspects of our sites to the individual user.
• Terms and conditions: We use cookies on our Websites to record when a site visitor has seen a policy, such as this one, or provided consent, such as consent to the terms and conditions on our Websites. This helps to improve the user’s experience of the site – for example, it avoids a user from repeatedly being asked to consent to the same terms. We also track whether a user has seen other similar documents (such as an online survey) before – again, to ensure that a user’s experience of our Websites is a smooth one.
• Session management: The software that runs our websites uses cookies for technical purposes needed by the internal workings of our servers. For instance, we use cookies to distribute requests among multiple servers, authenticate users and determine what features of the site they can access, verify the origin of requests, keep track of information about a user’s session and determine which options or pages to display in order for the site to function.
• Functional purposes: Functional purpose cookies store information that is needed by our applications to process and operate. For example, where transactions or requests within an application involve multiple workflow stages, cookies are used to store the information from each stage temporarily, in order to facilitate completion of the overall transaction or request.
• Advertising: Advertising cookies allow us (or third parties) to monitor the behaviour of users of our Websites. This information is used to ensure that products and services highlighted to those individuals are targeted in a focused and relevant manner – e.g. through advertisements on BlackRock websites or through advertisements on third party websites (e.g. Bloomberg, Agefi.com Handlesblatt.de, etc) which are based on your experience with our Websites; or to monitor the effectiveness of those digital marketing campaigns. We also monitor whether the adverts displayed on our Websites are of interest to users and retain this information to ensure that adverts seen by users of our Websites over a period of time are appropriate.
Please note that third parties may use cookies. The kind of cookies and the consequent data processing carried out by such third parties are regulated by their privacy policy. Please see below.
Cookies are necessary in order for you to be able to make full use of BlackRock’s Websites. In addition, cookies help us provide you with personalised features on our Websites. If you chose to disable cookies, some of BlackRock’s Website’s functionality might be impaired.
On certain of our Websites, we include content designed for display using Adobe Flash Player, such as animations, videos and tools. Local flash storage (often referred to as “Flash cookies”) can be used to help improve your experience as a user. Flash storage is retained on your device in much the same way as standard cookies, but is managed directly by your Flash software.
If you wish to disable or delete information stored locally in Flash, please see the documentation for your Flash software, located at www.adobe.com. Please note that, if you disable Flash cookies, some site functionality may not work.
When you visit our Websites, you may receive cookies that are set by third parties. These may include cookies set by Google, Bizo, LinkedIn, AppNexus, Xaxis, MediaMind and/or Rocketfuel. These cookies are used for the purposes described in the “Why Do We Use Cookies?” section of this policy. We do not control the setting of these third party cookies, so we suggest you might wish to check the third party websites for more information about their use of cookies and how to manage them.
If you wish to remove cookies set by our Websites from your browser in the future, you may delete them. The instructions for removing cookies from your computer or mobile device depend on the operating system and web browser you use. Please note, however, that withdrawing your agreement to the use of cookies on our sites will impair the functionality of the sites.
The site www.allaboutcookies.org includes instructions for managing cookies on many commonly used browses, or you may consult the vendor documentation for your specific software.
If you would like to find out more about cookies in general and how to manage them, please visit www.allaboutcookies.org.
If you would like to find out more about the third party cookies which we use on our website, you can access the third party.