Schools have first been sorted by the percentage of pupils obtaining at least five A*-C grades (or equivalent) including English and maths, and then by the average GCSE points score per pupil.
The point score is worked out by attributing a number to each grade - for example, an A* at GCSE is awarded a 58, A is 52, B is 46, C is 40 and D is 34.
The table also includes the percentage of students achieving the English Baccalaureate (EBacc), a performance measure which recognises where pupils have secured a C grade or better across core academic subjects including English, maths, geography or history, the sciences and a language.
Government plans, announced in the summer, state that all pupils starting Year 7 in September could be required to take the Ebacc subjects when they reach GCSEs in 2020. The plans have been strongly criticised by a number of education groups, who say the academic focus is too narrow.
This year, the Blue Coat School - Liverpool's one remaining grammar school - has taken the top spot, according to our measures - rising from 57th position last year.
The dramatic rise can be attributed to the school achieving 100 per cent on the first measure, compared with 99 per cent last year. However, even looking at the second measure 'Average point score per pupil', the school still ranks top - rising from second place last year.
In second place is Colyton Grammar School, Devon, which has risen from 56th position last year, due to their 100 per cent success rate at the first measure. Their average point score per pupil also sees the school take second place in the rankings.
The English Baccalaureate (EBacc) is a performance measure which shows how many pupils get a grade C or above in the core academic subjects - maths, English, the sciences, a language and history or georgraphy - at GCSE.
The Government introduced the EBacc in 2010, and last year announced plans for all pupils who start Year 7 in September 2015 to take the EBacc subjects at GCSE in 2020. The consultation on the Ebacc proposals ends at the end of January 2016.
Note: Schools with no data are excluded from the tables for several reasons, including: small numbers of pupils (which risks an individual pupil’s results being identified); investigations into maladministration of tests; or for other reasons beyond the school's control. Many independent and state schools score zero (or very low scores) if they enter all or most pupils for alternative qualifications that are not accredited by the Government. This includes certain IGCSEs.