Selected Annual Climate Records for 2011 - Green dots show the wettest, yellow dots the driest, red dots the warmest and blue dots the coolest records.
According  to NOAA scientists, 2011 was a record-breaking year for climate extremes, as  much of the United States  faced historic levels of heat, precipitation, flooding and severe weather,  while La Niña events at both ends of the year impacted weather patterns at home  and around the world.
NOAA’s  annual analysis of U.S. and global conditions, conducted by scientists at  NOAA’s National Climatic Data Center, reports that the average temperature for  the contiguous U.S. was 53.8 degrees F, 1.0 degree F above the 20th  century average, making it the 23rd warmest year on record.  Precipitation across the nation averaged near normal, masking record-breaking  extremes in both drought and precipitation.
On  a global scale, La Niña events helped keep the average global temperature below  recent trends. As a result, 2011 tied with 1997 for the 11th warmest year on  record. It was the second coolest year of the 21st century to date, and tied  with the second warmest year of the 20th century.
Key highlights of the report include:
U.S. weather and climate disasters
From extreme drought, heat waves and floods to unprecedented tornado outbreaks, hurricanes, wildfires and winter storms, a record 14 weather and climate disasters in 2011 each caused $1 billion or more in damages — and most regrettably, loss of human lives and property.
Scientists,  researchers and leaders in government and industry use NOAA’s monthly and  annual reports to help track trends and other changes in the world's climate.  This climate service has a wide range of practical uses, from helping farmers  know what and when to plant, to guiding resource managers’ critical decisions  about water, energy and other vital assets.
NOAA’s mission is to understand and predict  changes in the Earth's environment, from the depths of the ocean to the surface  of the sun, and to conserve and manage our coastal and marine resources. Join  us on Facebook, Twitter and our other social media channels.