A new analysis indicates the millions of abortions that have taken place since the Supreme Court ushered in an era of unlimited abortions via Roe v. Wade have killed more Americans than were alive in the entire country in 1800.
This is according to numbers published by the U.S. Census Bureau and the Guttmacher Institute, according to the analysis from CNS News:
In 1880, according to the Census Bureau, there were 50,189,209 people in the United States. These included, the Census Bureau notes, Mark Twain, who had not yet written The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn; Thomas Edison, who would start his electrical company two years later; and Booker T. Washington, who would open the Tuskegee Institute the next year.
The Guttmacher Institute has estimated the number of abortions in the United States in each year from 1973 through 2011. They add up to 51,376,750—or 1,187,541 more than the entire population of the nation as of 1880. In each of the last 36 straight years for which Guttmacher has published an estimate of the number of abortions, the number has exceeded 1 million.
The analysis actually underestimates the number of abortions in the United States since Roe. The figure is much closer to 58 million abortions, as LifeNews noted back in January — since the CNS analysis stops at 2011.
The United States marked 42 years of legalized abortion in all fifty states at any time for any reason throughout pregnancy on January 22nd, the anniversary of the Roe v. Wade Supreme Court decision. Since that time, there have been approximately 57,762,169 abortions that have destroyed the lives of unborn children.
A few years ago, in the document, “Abortion Statistics: United States Data and Trends,” National Right to Life Committee education director Dr. Randall K. O’Bannon issued an estimate of the number of abortions tabulated annually by the Centers for Disease Control and the pro-abortion Guttmacher Institute up to that point.
Guttmacher receives numbers directly from abortion centers themselves and is the prime source for more current figures because the Centers for Disease Control has never tabulated accurate numbers of abortions. The CDC provides some help in tabulating abortion figures, but it relies on figures from state health departments, some of which rely on voluntary reporting — and it hasn’t had data from some states such as California and New Hampshire for more than a decade.
// <![CDATA[
(function(d, s, id) {   var js, fjs = d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0];   if (d.getElementById(id)) return;   js = d.createElement(s); js.id = id;   js.src = "//connect.facebook.net/en_US/all.js#xfbml=1";   fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js, fjs); }(document, 'script', 'facebook-jssdk'));
// ]]&gt;
“Because of these different methods of data collection, GI has consistently obtained higher counts than the CDC. CDC researchers have admitted it probably undercounts the total number of abortions because reporting laws vary from state to state and some abortionists probably do not report or under-report the abortions they perform,” O’Bannon says.
Then, last year, O’Bannon calculated there had been over 56.6 million abortions — using Guttmacher estimates to determine the approximate number of abortions for 2013.
“Thus the 56 million+ figure comes from the mathematical application of the assumption that the Guttmacher numbers will roughly reflect the same declining percentage in the number of abortions that the CDC found,” he said at the time.
Since then, Guttmacher released a new report showing 1.1 million abortions in 2011 and showing abortions declining to historic lows. That report came early in 2014 and the CDC issued a report late last year. The CDC showed that from 2010 to 2011, the total number and rate of reported abortions decreased 5% and the abortion ratio decreased 4%, and from 2002 to 2011.
Because neither agency has abortion figures since 2011, abortions for years after that must be estimated based on old data. Because Guttmacher has the more accurate abortion records of the two, their figure of 1.1 million abortions is the most reliable per year. Adding that to last year’s total yields 57,762,169 — a number that may admittedly be adjusted slightly downwards assuming the trend of fewer abortions continues after the last reported totals from 2011.