Thank you for contacting me about calls for the Government to relocate unaccompanied children from Europe.
Throughout the migrant crisis, the Government has continuously adopted a twin-track approach to dealing with the migrant crisis: helping the most vulnerable while not encouraging new perilous crossings to Europe.  I understand the strength of feeling when the safety of unaccompanied children is at stake, so I am glad that it has been announced that unaccompanied asylum-seeking children will be resettled from Greece, Italy and France following discussions between the Government and Save the Children.
This initiative builds on the announcement that up to 3,000 vulnerable children and family members will be resettled direct from the Middle East and North Africa, and adds to the ongoing resettlement of 20,000 people direct from Syrian refugee communities.
Resettlement will be restricted to children registered before the EU migration agreement with Turkey came into force on March 20th.  The retrospective nature of the scheme will avoid creating a perverse incentive for families to entrust their children to people traffickers.  It will also mean that the UK can focus on the most vulnerable children already in Europe without encouraging more to make the journey.  Those at risk of trafficking or exploitation will be prioritised for resettlement, while existing family reunion routes will be accelerated. It is important to note that this will be separate to any EU-administered resettlement schemes.
There is not a fixed number on arrivals but instead the Government will work with local authorities across the UK to determine how many children will be resettled.  First arrivals are expected before the end of the year.  No country has done more than Britain when it comes to helping Syrian refugees, and I am glad that now this help will continue.
Work has begun on how best to implement the legislation and the Government is committed to act as quickly as it can, while ensuring that it has the necessary services in place to care for these children alongside those who are already in the UK and have claimed asylum here.