Notwithstanding the exception from withholding under chapter 3 on interest described under this heading, withholding may still
apply under chapter 4 when the payment is a withholdable payment and an exception from withholding under chapter 4 does not
apply.
Certain interest is subject to a reduced rate of, or exemption from, withholding.
The rules for determining whether interest is portfolio interest changed for obligations issued after March 18, 2012. Before
March 19, 2012, portfolio interest included interest on certain registered and nonregistered (bearer) bonds if the obligations
meet the requirements described below.
For obligations issued after March 18, 2012, portfolio interest does not include interest paid on debt that is not in registered
form, except for interest paid on foreign-targeted registered obligations issued before January 1, 2016, as described in 
Foreign-targeted registered obligations
, later.
There are arrangements to ensure that the obligation will be sold, or resold in connection with the original issue, only to
a person who is not a United States person,
Interest on the obligation is payable only outside the United States and its possessions, and
The face of the obligation contains a statement that any United States person who holds the obligation will be subject to
limits under the United States income tax laws.
Any receipts, sales, or other cash flow of the debtor or related person.
Income or profits of the debtor or related person.
Any change in value of any property of the debtor or a related person.
Any dividend, partnership distributions, or similar payments made by the debtor or a related person.
The contingent interest rule does not apply to any interest paid or accrued on any indebtedness with a fixed term that was
issued:
On or before April 7, 1993, or
After April 7, 1993, pursuant to a written binding contract in effect on that date and at all times thereafter before that
indebtedness was issued.
The date of distribution by the partnership.
The date the foreign partner disposed of its indirect interest in the REMIC residual interest.
The last day of the partnership's tax year.
A disposition of the partnership's residual interest in the REMIC,
A disposition of the foreign partner's interest in the partnership, or
Any other reduction in the foreign partner's allocable share of the partnership's part of the REMIC net income or deduction.
Shareholder of a real estate investment trust (REIT).
Participant in a common trust fund.
Patron of a subchapter T cooperative organization.
In general, payees of interest from a U.S. trade or business of a foreign corporation are entitled to reduced rates of, or
exemption from, tax under a treaty in the same manner and subject to the same conditions as if they had received the interest
from a domestic corporation. However, a foreign corporation that receives interest paid by a U.S. trade or business of a foreign
corporation also must be a qualified resident of its country of residence to be entitled to benefits under that country's
tax treaty. If the payee foreign corporation is a resident of a country that has entered into an income tax treaty since 1987
that contains a limitation on benefits article, the foreign corporation need only satisfy the limitation on benefits article
in that treaty to qualify for a reduced rate of tax.
Alternatively, a payee may be entitled to treaty benefits under the payer's treaty if there is a provision in that treaty
that applies specifically to interest paid by the payer foreign corporation. This provision may exempt all or a part of this
interest. Some treaties provide for an exemption regardless of the payee's residence or citizenship, while others provide
for an exemption according to the payee's status as a resident or citizen of the payer's country.
A foreign corporation that pays interest must be a qualified resident (under section 884 of the Internal Revenue Code) of
its country of residence for the payer's treaty to exempt payments from tax by the foreign corporation. However, if the foreign
corporation is a resident of a country that has entered into an income tax treaty since 1987 that contains a limitation on
benefits article, the foreign corporation need only satisfy the limitation on benefits article in that treaty to qualify for
the exemption.
Deposits with persons carrying on the banking business,
Deposits or withdrawable accounts with savings institutions chartered and supervised under federal or state law as savings
and loan or similar associations, such as credit unions, if the interest is or would be deductible by the institutions, or
Amounts left with an insurance company under an agreement to pay interest on them.
Derived from sources outside the United States, and
Attributable to the active conduct of a trade or business in a foreign country or possession of the United States by the domestic
payer.
At least 80% of the payer’s gross income from all sources has been from active foreign business for the 3 tax years of the
payer before the year in which the interest is paid, or for the applicable part of those 3 years.
The recipient is not a related person. Use rules similar to those in section 954(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code to determine
if the recipient is a related person.
The interest is paid on an obligation issued before August 10, 2010.
The obligation has not been significantly modified since August 10, 2010.
It was in existence on January 1, 2011.
For the 3 tax years beginning before January 1, 2011 (or for its years of existence if the corporation was in existence for
less than 3 tax years), at least 80% of its gross income from all sources was active foreign business income.
It continues to meet the 80-percent test for every tax year beginning after December 31, 2010.
It has not added a substantial line of business after August 10, 2010.