The shocking murder of two US journalists during a live TV broadcast has shined a spotlight yet again on the problem of gun violence in America.
Amid the never-ending debate on guns, here are key facts and figures surrounding the controversial issue in the country where more people per capita are killed by firearms than in any other developed nation.
The United States has the highest rate of private gun ownership of any developed nation, at nearly 89 firearms per 100 people. It also leads overwhelmingly in the number of firearm deaths.
For every 1 million Americans, there are 29.7 homicides by firearm each year, the Human Development Index reported.
Switzerland, the nation with the next highest rate, has 7.7 firearm homicides per million people, while Australia, which saw its gun death rate plunge by more than half since 1996 when it tightened gun laws, has just 1.4 firearm homicides per million.
US mass shootings occur with devastating frequency. According to the Mass Shooting Tracker, there have been 248 mass shootings in the 238 days of 2015.
Despite the frequency of homicides, suicides actually comprise the largest number of US gun deaths - 21,175 in 2013, compared to 11,208 firearm homicides, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
While the US Constitution's Second Amendment enshrines the right to bear arms, the laws on possession and purchase of firearms vary from state to state.
Since the 1980s, states have trended towards a loosening of gun laws. The National Rifle Association has spent millions of dollars in successful efforts to help roll back dozens of gun restrictions since 2009.
The federal regulation known as the Brady Law requires background checks, but only for sales by a licensed gun dealer. Gun control groups say that leaves about 40 per cent of purchases with no background check requirements.
Studies have shown more guns per capita in a state results in more firearm homicides. According to the Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence (LCPGV), of the 10 states with the strongest gun laws, seven of them also record the lowest gun death rates.
Three states - California, Florida and Illinois - plus the District of Columbia prohibit openly carrying any firearm in public. Others like New York and Illinois ban open carry except in some circumstances including hunting in rural areas.
Among the states with looser restrictions, Georgia recently passed legislation allowing weapons inside bars and churches.
An LCPG report last year ranked Louisiana last in its gun law rankings. The state does not require a permit for gun purchases, buyers need not register their firearms, and gun dealers do not need to obtain a state licence.
After a deranged gunman used a semi-automatic rifle to kill 20 children and six adults at a Connecticut elementary school in 2012, Congress took up legislation to expand background checks and ban certain assault weapons. Both efforts failed.
Despite the setback, polls continue to show the public supports expanded background checks, particularly in order to keep guns out of the hands of the mentally ill.
However, a Pew Research Center study last December concluded for the first time, more Americans said protecting gun rights was more important than imposing controls on gun ownership.
Some states have filled the gap. Five states strengthened unlicensed gun sale regulations by requiring background checks on all gun sales, or improved the purchase permit process.
A few states, including Connecticut, strengthened restrictions on military-style assault weapons as well.
Businesses also have taken action. The two largest movie theatre chains now forbid guns on their premises.
And Walmart, the world's largest retailer, said on Thursday (local time) it would no longer stock semi-automatic weapons.