Good news: more than nine  out of ten parents in the UK now choose to have their children vaccinated  against measles, mumps and rubella (MMR).
However, this recovery just  puts efforts to eliminate measles back where they were before the dramatic  decline which began in the late 1990s.
The UK was ground zero for  one of the most damaging vaccine scares in history: an epidemic of fear that  the MMR vaccine was linked in some way to autism. The scare was sparked by a  small and thoroughly  debunked study by Andrew  Wakefield, a medical doctor branded as “dishonest and irresponsible”  by his peers.
14 years later, vaccination  rates have recovered in the UK, with 91% of children now vaccinated against  measles, mumps and rubella. This is the highest rate of MMR uptake since the publication  of Wakefield’s paper in The Lancet in  1998. The paper has since been withdrawn by the journal with an admission that  its central thesis was “utterly  false”.
At its lowest – in 2003/2004 – just 80% of children  were being vaccinated against measles, mumps and rubella. This national average  disguises an even worse picture in several areas where it was significantly  lower. While this means that a strong majority of parents were still having  their children vaccinated, it was not enough.
The World Health  Organisation (WHO) recommends that 95% of  children are vaccinated against measles in order to protect everyone through herd  immunity. This is particularly important for the minority of children who  cannot be vaccinated for health reasons, such as children with immune system  problems or who are suffering from cancer.
Even the MMR uptake rates of 91%  reported by UK authorities are thought to be too low to protect the whole  community. The latest figures are welcome but mean that health authorities are  back where they started in the mid-1990s when immunisation rates were also below  the target.
There is other encouraging news  though. Uptake of vaccines generally appears to be rising. Uptake of the  five-in-one vaccine (which can protect against diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, polio and Hib) is also up to 94.7%.
Perhaps public confidence in  vaccines is on the up in the UK and we can hope that this positive trend, like  the initial health scare, will spread. Alas, tens of thousands of unimmunised children  have contracted measles in Europe in recent years which is likely to have  ‘helped’ remind people of the need and value of immunisation campaigns.