To understand the danger of Hamas and the origin of its terror, one must first truly understand what Hamas is and the ideology for which it stands.
Hamas was founded in 1987 by Sheik Ahmed Yassin and Mahmoud Zahar during the First Intifada as a wing of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood. However, firstly, the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood calls for the establishment of an Islamic legal system in the Muslim world and only afterwards it turns its attention to the issue of Palestine. On the other hand, Hamas views jihad as the only way of solving the Palestinian issue. Sheik Ahmed Yassin stated in 1987 through the Hamas Charter, that Hamas was founded to liberate Palestine from Israeli occupation and to establish an Islamic state in the area that is now Israel, Judea & Samaria, and the Gaza Strip. The very first quote of the Hamas Charter defines its Islamic supremacist character:
“You [Islamic nation] are the best nation that has been raised up unto mankind.” (Quran, Sura 3:110).
Hamas believes that this supremacy of Islam obligates it to literally exterminate millions of people who hold different beliefs than Islam, foremost the Jews.
The following are current examples of the expression of the radical and inhumane ideology of Hamas:
“Regarding the Jews, our business with them is only through bombs and guns[…]” (Nizar Rayan, Hamas’ religious and military leader, Al-Aqsa TV (Hamas), December 31st, 2008)
In an article in Al-Rissala, Hamas’ official newspaper, Hamas promotes the extermination of the Jews by use of suicide terror against Israel for the good of the world:
“We find more than one condemnation and denunciation of the resistance operations and bombings, carried out by Hamas and the Palestinian resistance branches… [Eventually] everyone will know that we did this only because our Lord commanded so: ‘I did it not of my own accord’ [Quran] and so that people will know that the extermination of Jews is good for the inhabitants of the worlds.” (April 23rd, 2007)
Sheikh Yunus Al-Astal, a Hamas member of parliament who writes a regular column in Hamas’ newspaper Al-Rissala, wrote the following article in the issue of March 13th, 2008. Headline:
“Suffering by Fire is Jews’ destiny in this world and next… you will taste the punishment of Scorching Fire.” [Quran 3:181]
“This [Quran] verse threatens the Jews with the punishment of Fire… the reason for the punishment of Fire is it is fitting retribution for what they have done… but the urgent question is, is it possible that they will have the punishment of Fire in this world, before the great punishment [of Fire in Hell] … many of the [Islamic] religious leaders believe that the [Jews’] punishment of Fire is in this world, before the next world… therefore we are sure that the Holocaust is still to come upon the Jews.”
Not only does Hamas constantly preach hatred of Jews in their publications but also publicly boasts about their complete disregard of the lives of their own population. Fathi Hammad, the Interior Minister of Hamas, proudly announced in his speech in front of thousands of people, that was also broadcasted on Al-Aqsa TV, Hamas’ official channel,  that the Palestinians had turned death into an “industry” and closed his speech with a message to “the Zionist enemy”:
It is a core belief of Hamas that the killing of Jews is any Muslim’s religious duty and prerequisite to redemption. When one understands the foundation of Hamas’ ideology one can understand the reasons for the ongoing terror against Israel’s innocent civilians