In 2015-16, the Department will continue working to reduce preventable disease by providing a range of cancer screening services and fast-tracking the full implementation of biennial bowel screening for all Australians aged 50 to 74 years. The Department will continue to improve immunisation coverage rates including through broader and better immunisation data capture, an incentive to immunisation providers to complete ‘catch-up’ vaccinations, and activities to improve the community’s understanding and awareness of the NIP. The Department will also work with States and Territories to expand the NIP to include two new programmes – an 18 month booster dose of pertussis (whooping cough) vaccine; and a National Shingles Vaccination Programme for 70 year olds (with a catch-up program for 71-79 year olds).
Work is currently underway to develop a National Strategic Framework for Chronic Conditions (NSFCC), which will supersede the National Chronic Disease Strategy 2005. The approach for the NSFCC reflects a shift towards a high-level strategic policy that considers a broad range of chronic conditions and recognises links with an array of relevant national and state-based strategies. The NSFCC will better cater for shared health determinants, risk factors and multimorbidites across a broad range of chronic conditions, recognising that there are often similar underlying principles for the prevention, management and treatment of many chronic conditions. This work will provide the opportunity to consider how best to facilitate coordinated, integrated and multidisciplinary care and recognise patient needs across the continuum of care.
The Department will be involved in the legislative changes associated with the proposed reforms to the framework for country of origin labelling for food. The new framework proposes the regulation of country of origin labelling for food through a mandatory information standard under the Australian Consumer Law, rather than through the existing standard in the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code.
In 2014-15, Outcome 1 was the responsibility of Office of Health Protection, Population Health Division, and Primary and Mental Health Care Division.
In 2014-15, the Department worked to achieve this Outcome by managing initiatives under the following programmes.
Programme 1.1 aims to reduce the incidence of chronic disease by: encouraging Australians to lead healthy lifestyles; improving detection, treatment and survival outcomes for people with cancer; reducing the incidence of blood borne viruses and sexually transmissible infections; supporting the development and implementation of evidence-based food regulatory policy; and improving access to high quality palliative care services.
Chronic diseases, such as diabetes mellitus, asthma and heart disease, are the leading causes of death and disability in Australia.9 The Department is working to reduce the incidence and improve the management of chronic disease, in line with evidence-based best practice.
Poor diet is the leading cause of disease burden in Australia and internationally. A dietary pattern consistent with the Australian Dietary Guidelines can assist to promote health and wellbeing and reduce the risk of diet-related conditions such as obesity, heart disease and diabetes. The Australian Government provides a suite of educational resources on healthy eating as part of the Eat for Health programme. In 2014-15, a new resource was developed to promote healthy eating amongst the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander population. The new Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Guide to Healthy Eating will be a key education tool for nutrition educators and health workers to use in a range of Indigenous community settings.
In 2014-15, the Diabetes Care Project pilot was completed, with the public release of the Evaluation Report. The pilot tested new models of health care delivery to improve care for adults with either type 1 or type 2 diabetes and involved over 7,500 patients from around 150 general practices in Queensland, Victoria and South Australia.
Findings from the Evaluation Report are already being used by the Department to develop policies that will better support chronic disease management in the future. The findings will support primary care researchers and the new Primary Health Networks to develop their own innovative health care approaches.
The findings from the evaluation will also feed into the work of the new Primary Health Care Advisory Group. This group will consider innovative care and funding models, along with better care for people with complex and chronic illness, better recognition and treatment of mental health conditions, and greater connection between primary health care and hospital care.
There was overwhelming engagement from stakeholders and members of the public with over 400 submissions received. Additional time has been allocated to review the submissions and to inform the Strategy. The Strategy is expected to be finalised by the end of 2015.
The Department has continued to work with the States, Territories and New Zealand implementing the outcomes of the independent report Labelling Logic: Review of Food Labelling Law and Policy. The ongoing work will endeavour to balance improving the information on food labels to meet consumers’ needs, while maintaining marketing flexibility and minimising the regulatory burden on industry and barriers to trade.
Bowel cancer is one of the most common forms of cancer in Australia. Screening using faecal occult blood tests can detect asymptomatic early bowel cancers and pre-cancers when treatment is more effective and lives can be saved.
In 2014-15, the Department successfully negotiated variations to contracts and agreements for the delivery of the National Bowel Cancer Screening Program to enable people aged 70 and 74 years to be invited to undertake bowel screening from 1 January 2015. The Department also launched the campaign A Gift for Living campaign to inform 50-74 year olds of the Program expansion and increase participation.
Media activities included print (national, regional, community press, consumer magazines), radio (metro and regional), and out of home and online channels. Media activities were also adapted for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and culturally and linguistically diverse audiences by specialist agencies.
In 2013-14, a participation rate of 36.0% was recorded; an increase from the previous reporting period primarily due to a higher rate (73.5%) of participation in the second screening round.
Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer affecting Australian women (after non-melanoma skin cancer). Age, not family history, is the biggest risk factor in developing breast cancer. Expanding the BreastScreen Australia Program target age range by five years from women aged 50-69 years to women aged 50-74 years will ensure more Australian women are screened. This will increase the chances of detecting breast cancer early, and through this, save more lives.
In 2014-15, the Department continued to work with the States and Territories to provide free screening in the expanded age range of women 50-74 years of age.
Media activities included print (national, regional, community press, consumer magazines), radio (metro and regional), and out of home (static panel of mainstream advertisement in female bathrooms across State and Territory Returned Services League facilities) and online channels. Media activities were also adapted for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and culturally and linguistically diverse audiences by specialist agencies.
From 2013 to 2014, 53.7% of women in the target age group participated in the programme. This compares to 54.6% in 2011-12 and 2010-11.
The Department funds the McGrath Foundation to provide specially trained breast care nurses to assist and care for women diagnosed with breast cancer, their families and carers. This programme aims to improve the quality of care received by Australians experiencing breast cancer, in particular for Australians residing in rural and regional areas. Around 86 per cent of the nurses funded by the Department are situated in rural and remote communities.
In 2014-15, the Department continued work in the areas of early detection and prevention of cervical cancer through the National Cervical Screening Program. Since the introduction of this programme in 1991, there has been a 50 per cent reduction in deaths from cervical cancer.11
A review of cervical screening policy was completed in April 2014 and resulted in recommendations to replace the Pap smear with a new cervical screening test. The Australian Government has accepted these recommendations and the new programme will commence on 1 May 2017 when the new cervical screening test will become available on the Medicare Benefits Schedule. The new cervical screening test detects human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and has been found to be more effective, and just as safe, as the Pap smear. The new test is expected to further reduce cervical cancer incidence and deaths by at least 15 per cent.
In 2014-15, the Department supported education and prevention activities to reduce the incidence of Blood Borne Virus (BBV) and Sexually Transmissible Infection (STI). These activities aim to improve knowledge, attitudes and behaviours among target groups including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, culturally and linguistically diverse Australians, youth, people in rural and regional areas, and people who inject drugs.
The Department continued implementing the National Blood Borne Virus and Sexually Transmissible Infection Strategies 2014-2017. These strategies guide policies and programmes related to the prevention, testing, management and treatment of BBV and STI.
The Department has continued to work closely with State and Territory health departments and the sector to maximise efforts towards achieving the targets in the National Strategies. The Department developed the Implementation and Evaluation Plan for the Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council and the National Surveillance and Monitoring Plan for BBV and STI, which will assist in monitoring and measuring progress towards the targets.
Progress reports for 2014-15 have been evaluated and expected outcomes have been achieved to date.
To enhance the quality of palliative care service provision and support for people who are dying, their families and carers, the Department funds a range of national palliative care projects primarily focusing on education, training, quality improvement and advance care planning.
In 2014, the Department undertook a competitive grants round for national palliative care projects over a three year period from 2014-15 to 2016-17. In May 2015, the Assistant Minister for Health, the Hon Fiona Nash MP, announced the successful organisations to undertake several projects to address health professional skill development, service quality improvement, research and benchmarking, advance care planning, and knowledge building and awareness.
In 2014-15, the Department commenced a review of the Guidelines for a Palliative Approach in Residential Aged Care and the Guidelines for a Palliative Approach in Aged Care in the Community Setting. This review is expected to be completed in 2016.
Programme 1.2 aims to reduce the harm to individuals and communities from tobacco use and from the misuse of alcohol, pharmaceuticals and use of illicit drugs.
The Department has continued to support service delivery and education initiatives aimed at minimising the harmful effects of alcohol consumption, misuse of pharmaceuticals and use of illicit drugs.
In 2014-15, the Department continued to promote responsible alcohol consumption through increased education using the National Health and Medical Research Council’s Australian Guidelines to Reduce Health Risks from Drinking Alcohol. The Department also continued to support the Good Sports Programme, which aims to change behaviour and attitudes around alcohol consumption through partnerships with more than 6,500 sporting clubs. In addition, the Department continued to undertake activities outlined in the Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders (FASD) Action Plan to reduce the prevalence and impact of FASD.
In 2014-15, the National Drugs Campaign focused on the drug ‘ice’, targeting young people aged 18-25 years, who are at greater risk of ‘ice’ use, young people aged 14-17 years who are beginning to be exposed to illicit drugs and parents of 14-25 year olds. The campaign included digital/online, television and cinema advertising. The campaign supported public consultations for the National Ice Taskforce by encouraging people to provide feedback.
The Review of the Alcohol and Drug Treatment Services Sector was completed in 2014-15. The Department is progressing the outcomes from this review in consultation with the States and Territories to inform the approach to future funding, improve planning, address reporting and accountability, and improve the quality of services delivered.
Smoking remains one of the leading causes of preventable death and disease in Australia. In 2014-15, the Australian Government continued significant efforts to reduce tobacco use in Australia, including through a broad range of national tobacco control measures, including the National Tobacco Campaign (the Campaign).
In 2014-15, compliance and enforcement activities under the Tobacco Plain Packaging Act 2011 continued. The Department is required to report on contraventions of the Tobacco Plain Packaging Act 2011 and the 2014-15 report is included under Part 3.2: External Liaison and Scrutiny of this annual report.
Throughout 2014-15, the Government continued to fund the defence of legal challenges to the tobacco plain packaging legislation in international forums. The Department also undertook a post-implementation review of the tobacco plain packaging measure.
Programme 1.3 aims to increase national immunisation coverage rates and improve the efficiency of the National Immunisation Programme (NIP).
In 2014-15, the Department continued to provide free vaccines to eligible Australians through the NIP.
High immunisation rates were maintained in 2014-15 with nearly 91 per cent of children fully immunised. This included an increase for one year old children (91.3 per cent), a decrease for two year old children (89.2 per cent) and an increase for five year old children (92.3 per cent) compared to the previous year. From December 2014, the additional vaccines meningococcal C and varicella were included in the assessment of fully immunised children of two years of age. As more vaccines are added to the criteria of ‘fully immunised’, the coverage rates are likely to appear lower. However, this is expected to resolve over time.
In April 2015, the Government announced the addition of an 18 month booster dose of pertussis (whooping cough) vaccine under the NIP. The Department continues to work with States and Territories to implement this new immunisation programme, which is planned to commence in late 2015.
In late 2014-15, the Department commenced work on an incentive programme for immunisation providers to identify children who are overdue for vaccination and arrange for them to receive catch up vaccinations. This incentive programme, which will be available to providers in January 2016, forms part of the Improving Immunisation Coverage Rates measures announced in the 2015-16 Budget.
In 2014, the HPV vaccine coverage rate for Australian girls aged 15 years in 2014 who have received all three doses is 73.1 per cent up from 70.9 per cent last year. This coverage rate is among the best in the world. The National HPV Vaccination Program was extended to males from 2013. In 2014, the HPV vaccine coverage rate for Australian males aged 15 years was extremely positive at 60 per cent.
The National Seasonal Influenza Vaccination Program was expanded in 2014-15 to include Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children aged six months to less than five years, and included targeted communications materials and enhanced vaccine safety surveillance. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children are five times more likely to die from influenza, and are much more likely to be hospitalised than others who have access to free vaccine. Providing free influenza vaccines to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children is a positive step towards closing the gap in health outcomes.
In 2015, the Department noted high demand for free influenza vaccination under the NIP, similar to that experienced in 2014. More than 4.5 million doses of influenza vaccine were ordered by States and Territories. There was also high demand for influenza vaccine for the private market. The Department has worked closely with vaccine providers to ensure enough influenza vaccine is available for those most at risk of severe influenza.
The Strategy sets out action areas to maintain the successful delivery of the NIP, including further improvement of national immunisation coverage rates and vaccine delivery. The Strategy also addresses vaccine safety, security of vaccine supply for Australia into the future, and use of data from various sources to better monitor and evaluate the NIP. Progress against the priority areas is set out below.
Other key actions that have progressed during this period include an evaluation of the Australian Immunisation Handbook; review of the National Guidelines for Immunisation Education for Registered Nurses & Midwives; and a review of the National HPV Vaccination Program Register.
The Immunise Australia website14 is an important information resource for a range of audiences including health professionals, individuals and families for accurate, up-to-date, and evidence-based information on the NIP. In 2014-15, the Department updated the Immunise Australia website with improved functionality and useability, to provide more accessible and user friendly immunisation information to a wide audience.
The Department also managed a website to inform the public of the National HPV Vaccination Program which included resources such as fact sheets for parents, adolescents and health professionals; and information kits for schools, including brochures and posters.
During 2014-15, the Department implemented a more streamlined process for progressing future vaccine procurements to reduce the administrative burden on industry, States and Territories and the Department.