Can you tell me how many deaf people there are in the United
States?
[Note: You will need to obtain the Adobe
Acrobat Reader in order to view several of the documents mentioned
below.]
This seemingly straightforward question does not have a simple
answer. The answer is not simple because various definitions of
deafness are used, depending on where you look for answers, each
leading to a different estimate for the number of deaf people in the
United States. Below, we discuss the various surveys used to estimate
the size of the deaf population and report the answers they offer.
Please note that here at the Gallaudet Research Institute
(GRI), we do not routinely collect data that would answer this
question. The GRI manages the Annual
Survey of Deaf and Hard of Hearing Children and Youth.  The
Annual Survey pertains only to those young people identified by
their schools as receiving educational services related to their
deafness. We do not manage surveys of the adult deaf and hard of
hearing population.
A Brief Summary of Estimates for the Size of the Deaf Population
in the USA Based on Available Federal Data and Published Research:
About 2 to 4 of every 1,000 people in the
United States are "functionally deaf," though more than half became
deaf relatively late in life; fewer than 1 out of
every 1,000 people in the United States became deaf before 18 years of
However, if people with a severe hearing impairment are
included with those who are deaf, then the number is 4 to 10 times
higher. That is, anywhere from 9 to 22 out of
every 1,000 people have a severe hearing impairment or are deaf.
Again, at least half of these people reported their hearing loss after
64 years of age.
Finally, if everyone who has any kind of "trouble" with
their hearing is included then anywhere
from 37 to 140 out of every 1,000 people in the United States have
some kind of hearing loss, with a large share being at least
65 years old.
Where did we get the information for this summary?
Estimates of the number of deaf and hard of hearing persons in the
United States are typically based on one of two national household
surveys conducted by the federal government: the National Health Interview
Survey (NHIS) or the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP).  We provide a brief overview, in round
numbers, of what these and other surveys offer as partial answers to
the question of how many deaf people there are in the United
States.
SIPP. The SIPP is a multi-wave panel survey conducted
annually by the U.S.  Census Bureau. The estimates from this survey
appear to effectively separate those who are deaf from those who are
hard of hearing. From Wave 5 of the 2001 panel, this
degree-of-hearing-loss distinction is based on an individual's or
informant's response as to whether the individual should be identified
as having "difficulty hearing what is said in a normal conversation
with another person even when wearing your [his/her] hearing aid,"
with acceptable responses being "yes," "no," and "Person is deaf;" and
if the answer is "yes," followed up by if the individual is
"able to hear what is said in normal conversation at all."
adults, Questions ADQ6 and ADQ7; for
children, Questions CDQ11 and CDQ12)
We provide an independent analysis of SIPP public-use
data files from the 2001 Panel, Wave 5. These data allow for
national-level estimates of the prevalence of persons
over five years of age in the United States who report some level of
hearing impairment even with the use of a hearing aid. The advantage
to this analysis is that we can classify persons with hearing
impairment as either "functionally deaf" (namely, those identified as
either unable to hear normal conversation at all, even with the use of
a hearing aid, or as deaf) or hard of hearing.
Figure 1, below, summarizes the results from our analysis of the
SIPP. The age-related pattern of reported hearing trouble makes it
clear that most people with hearing impairment became deaf or hard of
hearing due to age-related
hearing loss – they had no "trouble" or
"difficulty" hearing during childhood or early adulthood.
Figure 1. Percentage of
persons who report difficulty hearing normal conversation by age
group, United States, 2002
Across all age groups, in the United States, approximately
1,000,000 people (0.38% of the population, or 3.8 per 1,000) over 5
years of age are "functionally deaf;" more than half are over 65 years
of age. About 8,000,000 people (3.7%) over 5 years of age are hard of
hearing (that is, have some difficulty hearing normal conversation
even with the use of a hearing aid). Again, more than half of those
who are hard of hearing are over 65 years of age. We emphasize that
these estimates are based upon self-reported (or informant-reported)
hearing difficulty and not on independent audiometric
measurements.
NHIS. The NHIS is conducted annually by National Center for
Health Statistics (NCHS). Degree of hearing loss or deafness is
determined by an individual's or informant's response to the question,
"Which statement best describes your [child's] hearing (without a
hearing aid): good, a little trouble, a lot of trouble, or
deaf?" (for
adults in 2003, Question ACN.420; for
children in 2003, Question CHS.250)
But NHIS reports do not clearly distinguish those who are deaf from
those who are hard of hearing. This is because all annually produced
(Series 10) reports combine "a lot of trouble" and
"deaf;" these categories are not reported separately. The
reason for this combination is that there are too few persons
identified as "deaf" in any given year to provide reliable
estimates.
In order to report those with "a lot of trouble" hearing separately
from those who are "deaf," we provide an independent analysis of NHIS
public-use data files for the years 1997-2003. By combining
multiple years in a single analysis, it is possible to dramatically
improve the reliability of national-level estimates of the
prevalence of persons in the United States who report some
level of hearing impairment.  That is, we can estimate the proportion
of the population with a particular degree of hearing impairment
during the time period from 1997-2003.
Figure 2, below, summarizes the results of this analysis of the
1997-2003 NHIS public-use data files. Just as noted above for the SIPP
findings, there is a clear age-related pattern of reported hearing
trouble because many respondents had "good" hearing during childhood
or early adulthood.
Figure 2.  Percentage of persons who report some level of
hearing trouble by age group, United States, 1997-2003
Across all age groups, approximately 600,000 people in the United
States (0.22% of the population, or 2.2 per 1,000) are "deaf;" more
than half are over 65 years of age. About 6,000,000 people (2.2%)
report having "a lot of trouble" hearing with, again, more than half
over 65 years of age. Over 28,000,000 people (10%) report having "a
little trouble" hearing with just less than a third over 65 years of
age, but more than half over 45 years of age. Altogether, more than
35,000,000 people (13%) report some degree of hearing trouble. Again,
we emphasize that these estimates are based upon self-reported (or
informant-reported) hearing trouble and not on independent audiometric
measurements.
If we were to compare the NHIS and SIPP results, it would not be a
fair comparison. The NHIS responses are based upon hearing trouble
without a hearing aid while SIPP responses are based upon
hearing difficulty even with a hearing aid (note: not all
persons with hearing difficulty wear a hearing aid, so persons who
reported difficulty hearing may or may not use a hearing aid).
Nonetheless, if a comparison must be made, only the responses for
persons over 5 years of age should be considered. The only change to
the "round numbers" resulting from ignoring responses for those under
6 years of age on the NHIS is that just less than 35,000,000 people
over 5 years of age report some degree of hearing trouble without the
use of a hearing aid. This hardly noteworthy change should not be too
surprising since the prevalence of early childhood hearing impairment
and deafness is low, so the number of persons to be subtracted from
the overall total is small and has little effect on total population
estimates.
NHANES. The
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) has been
conducted four times (periodically, over a multi-year period each
time, since 1971) by NCHS.  Unlike any of the other federal
surveys, NHANES has identified degree of hearing loss audiometrically
(i.e., by a formal pure-tone-threshold hearing test using an
audiometer rather than from responses to a self-reported hearing loss
scale). Based on analysis of NHANES III data, as well as regular and
supplemental NHIS data from the early 1990s, a research team sponsored
by the Project HOPE Center for Health Affairs estimated that somewhere
from 400,000 to 700,000 people have a severe or profound hearing loss
(those likely to be deaf; about 0.19% to 0.34% of the population, or 2
to 3 per 1,000).
Please note that the pure-tone-threshold audiometric data from NHANES
III were only for persons 6 to 19 years of age. The current
NHANES is collecting pure-tone-threshold audiometric data only for
persons 20 to 69 years of age. Estimates for a person's degree
of hearing loss from recent NHANES is otherwise based upon the same
self-reported "hearing trouble" scale used in the
Census 2000. As it turns out, the decennial census is not a
good source for deafness statistics. This is because the sensory disability
question on the census form (Question 16) did not separate those
who are deaf from those who are blind. The
U.S. Census Bureau estimates that there are over 9,000,000 people with
a severe sensory disability (3.62% of the population).  This
estimate is not a simple sum of all self-identified deaf and blind
persons, however, because some persons may have identified with having
"a severe vision or hearing impairment" instead.  Somewhere between
one-quarter and one-half of this group is likely to be persons with
deafness or a severe hearing impairment (i.e., about 0.9% to 1.8% of
the population, or 9 to 18 per 1,000). Note that about half of these
people are over 65 years of age, and about one-tenth under 18 years of
Annual Report to Congress on the Implementation of the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA Child Count).
For children and youth 6 to 21 years of age, the
IDEA Child Count prepared by the Office of Special Education Programs
(OSEP) offers some information on the prevalence of significant
hearing loss among schoolchildren. Over 70,000 children and youth were
identified as receiving IDEA-related special education because the
child had a "hearing impairment" of educational significance, which is
0.15% (1 to 2 per 1,000) of the total public K-12 school enrollment.
However, the Annual Survey informs us that there are many hard
of hearing children receiving special education (about 58%), not just
deaf children (about 42%), which would lead to estimates that fewer
than 1 of every 1,000 public schoolchildren is a deaf child receiving
special education while about 1 of every 1,000 is a hard of hearing
child in special education.
How many people are "Deaf" and how many use ASL?
For the last several years, many writers have distinguished
between those who are deaf and those who are "Deaf." The
capitalization indicates sociolinguistic affiliation in addition to
audiological distinction. None of the above federal survey activity
inquires about special language use or social identification among
those who are deaf (or hard of hearing). That is, there are no
questions about American Sign Language (ASL) or any other signed
language use on federal surveys. The only study that helps to answer
this question was done over 30 years ago (before IDEA, ADA, Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act, etc.). Based upon this old survey (part
of a project known as the National Census of the Deaf Population [NCDP]),
first estimated there may have been 500,000 persons who signed at home
in 1972 (about 0.24% of the population), only slightly over half of
whom were deaf (280,000 or 0.14% of the population). In other
words, in 1972, a little more than 1 of every 1,000 people in the
United States was a deaf person who reported s/he was a "good"
signer.
However, if we were to take a more liberal view of who would have
counted as an ASL user among those responding to the NCDP then, of
course, our numerical estimates would be higher. That is, including
those NCDP respondents who identified themselves as “fair”
or “poor” signers results in an estimated 642,000 persons
who signed at home in 1972, more than half of whom were deaf (375,000
or 0.19% of the population). These and other estimates are discussed
at greater length elsewhere:
Mitchell, Ross E., Travas A. Young, Bellamie Bachleda, and Michael A.
Karchmer. 2006, in press. "How Many People Use ASL in the United
States? Why Estimates Need Updating." Sign Language Studies,
Vol. 6, No. 3.
There is really no way to know if the proportion of deaf signers in
1972 has stayed close to the same over the last few decades. Certainly,
the medical, legal, social, economic, and educational circumstances for
Americans who are deaf have changed significantly since the NCDP.
Nonetheless, if the proportion of deaf signers has remained roughly the
same, then they would continue to number in the hundreds of thousands
today (360,000 to 517,000). Please keep in mind that this final estimate
is just that, an estimate (and a very rough one at that), and is not
based on any new data.
For additional information on deaf and hard of hearing persons in
the United States, please contact the National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS) or the US
Census Bureau.
More detailed or sophisticated analyses of the total deaf and hard
of hearing population in the United States, as determined using NCHS
measures, would require obtaining the NHIS and NHANES data files or
await future NCHS
Series 10 and NCHS
Series 11 reports, respectively. Similarly, access to analyses
using Census measures requires obtaining SIPP data files or awaiting
future SIPP
P-70 Reports.
For national estimates from 1990-91, which provide a careful
breakdown by level of "hearing trouble" and other
demographic characteristics, please refer to the GRI's Demographic
Aspects of Hearing Impairment: Questions and Answers (Third
Edition), 1994.
As noted above, the Project HOPE Center for Health Affairs
published a more narrowly focused analysis. "The Severely to
Profoundly Hearing Impaired Population in the United States:
Prevalence and Demographics" draws from multiple national
surveys during the early- to mid-1990s.
According to this review and reanalysis of national data (1990 and
1991 NHIS Hearing Supplement, 1994 and 1995 NHIS, and
NHANES III), an estimated one-half million Americans have
severe to profound hearing loss (those most likely to be called deaf),
8% of whom are children (3-17 years) and 54% of whom are adults 65
years of age or older.
Citation: Blanchfield, B. B., Dunbar, J., Feldman, J. J., &
Gardner, E. N.  (1999, August). The severely to profoundly hearing
impaired population in the United States: Prevalence and demographics.
Bethesda, MD: Project HOPE Center for Health Affairs. (A shorter
Policy Analysis Brief [Series H, Volume1, Number 1, October
1999] was published as well.)
For current summary information about a large sample of deaf and
hard of hearing children identified for educational services, see the
Annual
Survey: 2002-2003 Regional and National Summary. Additional
inquiries about current analysis of the Annual Survey should be
directed to Dr. Sen Qi.
Neither we at the GRI nor those at the Census Bureau, NCHS, or OSEP
can readily answer questions for which no reports have been prepared.
Also, please note that state- and local-level data on deaf and hard
of hearing persons are rarely available. We are not able to
provide any information on obtaining such data, however, we recommend
contacting state, county, or city public health departments to
determine if such data are available.
Ross E. Mitchell, 15 February 2005