There’s no state in the nation with fewer toddlers protected against measles, mumps and
rubella.
Ohio shares the bottom slot with West Virginia and Colorado, based on the most recent data
available from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. It says that 86 percent of 19 to
35-month-old Ohio children had the vaccine, according to the 2013 National Immunization Survey.
Nationally, 91.1 percent of preschoolers are vaccinated. Top states have rates of 96 or
above.
The nonprofit Trust for America’s Health highlighted the numbers on Wednesday, pointing to a
multi-state measles outbreak as evidence of what can go wrong when immunization rates dip.
Ohioans didn’t have to wait until the recent flurry of national headlines about the outbreak —
linked to Disneyland and responsible for illness in at least 102 people in 14 states, to understand
the damage that can ensue when a rarely seen illness starts to spread.
Last year,
a mumps
outbreak in and around Columbus raised concerns about vaccinations. Then it was measles, a bit
north of central Ohio, with an outbreak of 383 cases, primarily among unvaccinated Amish.
Higher percentages of unvaccinated people expose communities to outbreaks of diseases not
usually seen in the United States, and as the Disneyland outbreak continues to sicken people,
debates about stricter policies requiring vaccination have ensued.
The CDC recommends that children get two doses of the MMR vaccine, the first at 12 months to 15
months of age and the second between 4 and 6 years of age.
Children don’t get vaccines for a variety of reasons including missing well-child checkups. But
much of the conversation of late centers on parents who object to vaccinations, sometimes because
of fears linked to a since disproven study that suggested a link between the MMR vaccine and
autism.
Public health leaders acknowledge that Ohio looks bad in the latest tally of vaccinated
“I’m really very disappointed. In the past, we were recognized as one of the highest in the
nation for childhood vaccinations,” said Columbus Health Commissioner Dr. Teresa Long.
The immunization survey, which the CDC shared last year, also shows that Ohio is near the bottom
in terms of toddlers who’ve had a full vaccine series, with shots the protect against diseases
including polio, hepatitis, whooping cough and chickenpox.
Ohio’s coverage in that category was 61.7 percent, according to the survey. Only Nevada’s and
Arkansas’ rates were worse.
Long and others say a new state law that requires vaccines for kids entering licensed daycares
will boost the number who receive their shots in the years leading up to kindergarten.
Many Ohio kids catch up on their vaccines before they start school, where vaccines are required.
The state’s daycare and school vaccine laws allow for exemptions in cases in which parents object
or there are medical reasons.
And while the ongoing national conversation about vaccines remains contentious, it could improve
rates of immunized kids in the end, Long said.
“I think we’re starting to see a movement in which both parents and physicians are saying what
we in public health have been saying for awhile, that unvaccinated kids are putting all of us at
risk,” she said.
“We are only as safe as our weakest link, as our least protected.”
Long said she’d like to see vaccine requirements for college students as well and continues to
look for opportunities to push for policy that will increase vaccination rates.
Dr. Mary DiOrio, medical director at the Ohio Department of Health, also said the daycare law is
an important step.
She said the state tries to help through an immunization registry that allows doctors to track
what shots a child has.
“Clearly we have room to improve,” DiOrio said. “We would like to see the numbers as high as
possible and as close to 100 percent as possible.”
She and Long said that pediatricians play a critical role and that evidence shows that those who
are apprehensive about vaccination are most likely to accept it after a trusted healthcare provider
explains the science.
While Ohio certainly can do better, it’s important to acknowledge that the statistics on
immunization rates are imprecise, said Dr. Robert Frenck, a Cincinnati pediatrician and medical
director for adolescent immunization program for the American Academy of Pediatrics’ Ohio
chapter.
Depending on the state, the report includes a certain amount of potential variability above or
beyond the reported number. Ohio’s is plus or minus 5.2 percentage points.
“I would like to see 100 percent of children who are eligible for vaccines get them,” Frenck