The definition of gifted varies. Depending upon the definition, the target children in a  gifted education program and its delivery will be different. The word "gifted*1" can imply a quality given from heaven, which indicates  heritability. However, there is disagreement regarding what accounts for  giftedness, heritability or environmental contexts, or a complex interaction  between them.
According to the federal definition, gifted students are "children and youths who give evidence of  higher performance capability in such areas as intellectual, creative,  artistic, or leadership capacity, or in specific academic fields, and who  require services or activities not ordinarily provided by the schools in order  to develop such capabilities fully." Howard Gardner explains that a  child's special capability should be defined within a variety of areas: linguistic, logical-mathematical, musical, spatial, kinesthetic, interpersonal,  intrapersonal, naturalistic and existential (multiple intelligences). However,  the formal identification of gifted students is often done with IQ test scores  and standardized tests.
Regarding the population of gifted students in the United States,  there is no official data from the federal government. However, the National Association for Gifted Children (NAGC), the largest organization of gifted  education in the United States, estimates that there are about 3 million  academically gifted children in grades K-12, which is about 6% of the total  student population.
Gifted education is different from a type of early learning, which  is purportedly designed to create gifted children by investing a large amount  of time and resources (e.g., using flash cards, DVDs, and electronic  educational toys designed to stimulate the baby's brain). During the  orientation for a gifted program in my daughter's school district, we learned  about gifted children in comparison with bright children:
Table 1 Difference between Bright Child and Gifted Learner
In Table 1, the characteristics of gifted students are described  as highly curious, full of originality, excellent memorization skills, and  capable of mastering skills with few repetitions. Such students don't work very  hard to achieve high academic excellence. Yet, they appear to be perfectionist  and highly self-critical. Because their cognitive development is more advanced  than typically developing children, but often not their socio-emotional  development, they often have a difficult time getting along with children of  the same age. They often prefer to spend time with adults. However, there is  some variability among the characteristics of gifted children.
How will  gifted students be identified? It depends  on the definition of giftedness by the school district and the state. Many schools use a wide range of assessments, such as IQ test  scores, achievement tests, questionnaires from the classroom teacher and  parents, classroom observation, documentation, and  interviews. Although a high IQ has been the most common measure for placement,  there is some skepticism regarding the reliability of IQ test scores in  identifying giftedness. Yet, in the field of education practice, the data from  IQ tests are frequently used because quantitative results make it easier to  compare one student to another. Here are  some examples of criteria that are used to identify gifted students at the  school districts that the author's daughter attended*2.
Identification  Process: WISC-IV (intelligence test), Questionnaire to the parents and classroom teacher
Explanation: This district uses the criteria from the WISC-IV score at or  above the 98 percentile*3. At the state level, the 95 percentile  was the cut off. Because this district was located in a college town, the  standards were higher. The questionnaire was intended to evaluate the child's  language ability (e.g., "Has a large vocabulary"), learning style ("Learns and  retains skills rapidly, easily, efficiently, and with little repetition"),  motivation ("Becomes easily impatient with drill and routine procedures"),  socio-emotional development ("Is sensitive to feelings of others or to  situations"), and creativity ("Has several ideas about something instead of  just one").
Identification  Process: The Measures of  Academic Progress Test (MAP), Otis Lennon School Ability Test (OLSAT*4, intelligence test), Structure of Intellect (SOI, creativity test),  Questionnaire to the parent and classroom teacher
Explanation: The first step of the screening process is that a student is  nominated by the parent or the teacher, but he or she has to meet the academic  achievement at or above the 98 percentile in reading and math as  measured by the Measures of Academic Progress tests. Then, the nominated  student will take the Cognitive/intellectual test (OLSAT). If the score is at  or above the 98 percentile, the student will be eligible for the Highly Capable  Program. If not, the student will take the creativity test (SOI). If it meets  the requirement of at or above the 98 percentile, the student will be accepted  to the Highly Capable Program.
Identification  Process: Group or individual  ability tests (e.g., Otis Lennon School Ability Test, Reynolds Intellectual  Screening Test, Naglieri Nonverbal Ability Test, Cognitive Ability Test), Stanford Achievement Test, Questionnaire to  the parent and classroom teacher (higher grades), Teacher observations (lower grades).
Explanation: In this district a student is qualified for the gifted program,  if he or she meets the following two requirements, (1) Achievement Measurements  - Students scores at or above the 96 percentile for one of the subjects on the  Stanford Achievement Test, (2) Ability Measurements - Students score past the  first standard deviation to the right of the norm on ability measures (about 84  percentile).
By looking at the gifted  program placement for each school district, the common denominator is  intelligence tests and questionnaires for the parent and the teacher. However,  there is some variance in the level of students that are targeted. For example,  School District A and B require the students score to be at or above the 98  percentile on the intelligence test, and therefore, eligible students are far  fewer than School District C, which only requires at or above the 84 percentile.  For example, as for School District B, the number of gifted students in my  daughter's grade was a little less than 10%.
School District B  appears to have the strictest rule for determining eligible students. The  target students must be in the top 2 percent in both intellectual ability and  academic achievement scores. Furthermore, the nominated student must be at or  above the 98 percentile in reading and math achievement. Table 1 was  distributed during the school district orientation for the gifted programs. The  program is targeting children who are "beyond the group." According to a gifted  program coordinator at School District B, because the district is located in a  college town, they have to put the bar really high. Many of the children are  from families of academics or university administrators. In fact, this school district uses one grade above math curriculum for all district children.  Therefore, in order to provide sufficient service for gifted children, they had  to reduce the number by creating high standards for eligibility.
By contrast, selection  criteria for School District C are rather lenient. They don't require a student  to excel in both reading and math. In addition, the children's ability test  scores, such as on the OLSAT, only have to be above the 84 percentile. According  to a gifted program teacher in School District C, this district also takes into  account the educational philosophy of multiple intelligences by Howard Gardner.  They intentionally select students, not only based on intellectual ability, but  on other intelligences. In fact, at my daughter's school, among 13 classes in  her grade, 4 of them were gifted classrooms. The gifted program teacher  explained that they sometimes enroll students who are not really gifted but  high achieving due to pressure from parents*5.
There are several types of gifted programs in the United States.
Gifted students are pulled out of a regular classroom  to spend a portion of their time in a gifted class or school. For example, at  School District B, gifted students meet together once a week for about 2 hours in  one school, which is often different from their home campus. They spend time  engaging in academic tasks which are more complicated and difficult than those in  their regular classrooms. They also participate in a project of their own  interest. At District A, gifted students in grades 3-5 are transported to and  from the Center for Gifted Education for one full day of differentiated  instruction per week. They take interdisciplinary classes, which focus on a  topic or theme, such as "psychology" and "WWII." Students also work in homeroom groups  throughout the school year in order to foster their socio-emotional growth. As for District C, gifted students go to gifted classrooms for the  core subjects (language arts, math, science, social studies), while they share  the class with other students in other subjects (e.g., physical education,  music).
Enrichment programs provide a broad  range of advanced-level enrichment experiences. For example, gifted students  sometimes receive different and more challenging homework from the classroom  teacher. Or, based on their strengths and interests, they participate in events  such as Spelling Bees, Science Fairs, and Math Olympics. Some schools provide  extracurricular activities, such as Chess and Math Club for students and other learners.
Acceleration may take the form of skipping grades or  school. For example, some children start kindergarten early. This is based on  the view that school readiness is not dependent on the chronological age of the  child but the abilities of the child. In addition, some colleges offer early entrance programs that give gifted individuals of junior high and high  school age the opportunity to attend college early.
Many schools, especially junior highs  and high schools, in the U.S. use homogeneous grouping, which means that classes  are organized by ability and preparedness. For example, all of the three school  districts (A, B, C) offer PreAP (PreAdvanced Placement) courses for junior high  and high school students, and AP (Advanced Placement) courses for high school students. AP courses offer college level curriculums and exams for high school level students. The students can earn college credit and advanced placement  through AP courses. PreAP courses offer  an advanced and rigorous curriculum, which prepares students for AP classes and  other challenging coursework. This system allows students to graduate college  in a shorter period of time.
In the summer there are many programs  and camps for gifted children in the United States. A well-known gifted  education program is The Center for Talented Youth (CTY) at Johns Hopkins University. Their summer programs are held on many university campuses throughout  the United States and in other nations. Eligibility for CTY Young Students  summer program courses is determined by scores earned on the above-grade-level SCAT (School and College Ability Test), either alone or in combination with  CTY's Spatial Test Battery (STB).
The purpose of gifted education is not  only to provide educational content based on the abilities of gifted students. It is also designed to reduce the challenges  and difficulties they face on a daily basis. Some of the challenges are uneven  development (advanced intellectual ability and more age-level socio-emotional  and physical development), perfectionism, high adult expectation, and intense  sensitivity. Here are some examples of challenging behaviors among gifted students:
One possible reason of such difficulties is because the class is "too easy" for them. Additionally, the topic is not something that the gifted  student may be interested in. Therefore, the student is unable to focus on the  task or appears to be bored, which leads others to misinterpret his or her  behavior. In addition, isolation is one of the main challenges faced by gifted students  because of characteristics such as extreme sensitivity, perfectionism or  learning differences. In order to fit in, some gifted students try to hide their  ability or underperform. Because of social isolation and sensitivity, gifted students  sometimes demonstrate anxiety and depression more than their peers.
According to research conducted in the U.S., about 15-25% of gifted students  drop out of high school. The main reasons were reported as failing grades,  disliking school, finding a job, or becoming pregnant. Most of them were not  planning to go back to school. This tendency was much stronger for gifted students of low socio-economic status or from racial/ethnic minority groups.
In particular, the experts and parents need to be aware that there are some  similar traits between giftedness and ADHD. For example, characteristics of  ADHD children such as, poor attention, low tolerance for persistence on tasks,  power struggles with authorities, are also seen in gifted children who are  bored. Therefore, there is the possibility that some gifted children are  misdiagnosed with ADHD.
The gifted teacher in School District C expressed her concern  about misdiagnosis during the interview. Children who are raised in low income  families are more likely to be misdiagnosed for ADHD because they typically do  not receive enough educational stimulation at home. Those children might show some  symptoms of ADHD such as hyper activity or excessive energy, and therefore, the  experts recommend putting the child on the ADHD medicine. She often advises the  parents of the child to stop giving the ADHD medicine. As a result, some of  them demonstrate a rapid growth in academic achievement.
Recently, some children have been identified as "Twice  Exceptional." The term refers to gifted children who are also identified with  diagnosable conditions, such as learning disabilities, mental health problems,  and neurological disabilities (e.g., ADHD, Asperger Syndrome, Dyslexia). However, due to the masking of their  strengths and weaknesses, those children are very difficult to identify. They  often show greater asynchrony than average children (e.g., superior vocabulary, difficulty in written expression). Finding the right school for the twice  exceptional child can be challenging for the parent. Professional and public  awareness about twice exceptional is an urgent agenda.
Finally, I would like to discuss what Japan can learn from gifted  education in the United States. Among all Asian countries with top ranking PISA  (international assessment that focuses on 15-year-olds' capabilities in reading  literacy, mathematics literacy, and science literacy) scores (China, Korea,  Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan), Japan is the only country, which has no formal  policies supporting gifted education. Perhaps this is due to the Japanese  educational philosophy that teaches that every child should receive an equal education and special treatment should not be allowed. Japanese also view  gifted education negatively because it is associated with elitism. Furthermore, in Japan high academic achievement is viewed as the result of the student's  effort and hard work and not the result of innate abilities. However, this  cultural view is also found in other Asian countries such as China.
In 2011 an autobiography on parenting, Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother, by Yale law professor Amy Chua, prompted a huge response from readers,  both positive and negative. As the daughter of a Chinese immigrant, she  promoted the authoritarian, strict style of Chinese parenting, in contrast to  the permissive, indulgent style of Western (United States) parenting. Through  her book she explained how Chinese parenting style could produce academic high  achievers and musical prodigies. Although there has been strong criticism  toward her controlling and obsessive Chinese parenting style, there seem to be  some fears arising that the United States is not adequately preparing their  children to survive in the global economy against countries like China or other  countries, which strive to make their children academically successful. Chua  appears to believe that providing an optimal environment for the child to be  successful and pressuring the child to work hard is the key for giftedness, instead of the child's innate ability, will or interest. However, there are  possible side effects of overly strict and controlling parenting styles on  children's mental health (e.g., depression, high anxiety, and suicide).
I must add that highly devoted and sacrificial Japanese mothers  who relentlessly drove their children to study received world attention, and  much earlier than China. Yet, Japan gradually learned that too much academic  pressure on children creates social problems such as school phobia, suicides or other behavior problems. Consequently, Japanese education reforms took place to  provide "yutori kyoiku" (relaxed education) for students. This led to a decline in some basic academic skills for Japanese students in comparison to other  industrial countries. Currently, Japan is once again moving toward "datsu yutori kyoiku" (anti-relaxed education) to improve academic ability.
I believe that Japanese educators need to be aware of the fact  that students with high capability and talent sometimes end up dropping out or  failing, and/or experiencing difficulties and challenges at school as seen in  the findings from research on gifted students in the United States. In particular, the evaluation of children  with disabilities, such as ADHD, should be administrated comprehensively with the possibility of the child being gifted. Japanese policy makers need to keep in mind that postponing the implementation of gifted education may penalize  children with high performance capability in the current education system with its' orientation toward conformity.