This page contains information about national labor force statistics with demographic characteristics available from the Current Population Survey (CPS). Data on the labor force characteristics of employed and unemployed persons, plus hours of work and earnings, also are available.
Demographic labor force information for States, counties, and cities are available separately from the Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) program. Contact LAUS staff for state or city data.
Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics by age group. See also Older workers and Youth.
NOTICE Limited historical data are available for these tables due to
changes in the occupational and industry classification systems that affect comparability over time.
Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics for persons with or without certifications and licenses—credentials that demonstrate a level of skill or knowledge needed to perform a specific type of job. These non-degree credentials are distinct from Educational attainment.
Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics for persons with or without a disability. These are estimates for the nation as a whole; data are not available by state.
Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics by educational attainment for persons age 25 and older. See also Earnings by education, School enrollment and Certifications and licenses.
See also Women, including additional tables on parents, families, and marital status in the annual report on Women in the Labor Force: A Databook.
Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics by foreign- and native-born status (nativity).
See also Age.
Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics by single year of age for persons age 55 and older are available on request. Contact the Current Population Survey staff to obtain these data.
Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics for whites, blacks or African Americans, Asians, and persons of Hispanic or Latino ethnicity. See also Earnings by Demographics.
Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics for youth ages 16 to 24 by school enrollment status.  See also Youth and Educational attainment.
Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics for veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces by period of service and service-connected disability.
Beginning with data for January 2014, estimates for veterans incorporate updated weighting procedures that more accurately
reflect the current demographic composition of the veteran population. The new weighting methodology had little effect on unemployment rates for veterans, regardless of gender or period of service.
Learn more about the effect of the January 2014 weighting change on labor force estimates for veterans.
Beginning with data for January 2013, estimates for veterans incorporate population controls derived from an updated Department of Veterans Affairs population model.
In accordance with usual practice, BLS did not revise estimates for December 2012 and earlier months.
Statistics on persons who volunteer through or for an organization.
Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics for women.  See also Families and marital status and Earnings by demographics.
Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics for youth ages 16 to 24. See also Age and School Enrollment.
Last Modified Date: December 2, 2016