Obviously, concern over the safety of  abortions is paramount. The risk of death from induced abortions in the U.S. has been put at 1 in 160,000 – lower than the mortality risk from childbirth. (Source: JAMA 1992; 268: 3231-9).
Psychological trauma following induced abortion may occur: it is logical that a woman will feel sadness or regret. The strongest predictor of a more extreme reaction is the woman's mental health before the abortion. However,  the mental well-being of most women improves following the abortion (Robinson GE et al. Harvard Review of Psychiatry 2009; 17(4):268-290).
The quality of research on the existence of a 'post-abortion syndrome' varies widely and is clouded by partisan stances on both sides of the debate. You should carefully examine the quality of studies on the topic:  How representative was the sample studied? What was the comparison group? How was mental distress measured? Was the wantedness of the pregnancy controlled for? How were pre-existing mental conditions handled in the analyses? What other stressful circumstances did the women experience?
Here is  a perspective from Canadian novelist  Margaret Laurence:
“I  don’t believe anyone, including myself, is pro-abortion. I am pro-choice  because there are times when abortion is the least damaging course. Those who  would give the fertilized egg the same rights as a born child seem to me to  have precious little regard for those children once they are born. Nor do the anti-abortionists show much concern over the  rights and life of the mother. I have never met a woman who has had an abortion  flippantly or easily or without searching her heart and her soul. No doubt such  women do exist, but I believe they are in a small minority, and should be cared  for, for their shadowed pain. As for the young girls-terrified children,  really-who have been molested, subject to rape or incest, or simply, out of  desperate need, have sought what they mistakenly believed to be love and  caring, I think it is wicked to force them to bear the children of such  frightening unions, of such traumatizing and wounding encounters… The fires at  the Morgentaler Clinic in Toronto, the bombing of various abortion clinics in  America, the harassment of women entering these clinics – all these demonstrate  to me not a concern over the sanctity of human life but, on the contrary, a  deeply aggressive and punitive attitude towards women on the part of a basically  male establishment.”
We have some estimates of the prevalence of unsafe abortions in the world (figures per 1000 women aged 15-49):