We offer a comprehensive series of 11+ Exam Papers available to buy in hard copy or PDF download covering English, Maths, Verbal Reasoning and Non-Verbal Reasoning. Each paper is aligned with the National Curriculum, ISEB 11+, Kent and Bucks 11+ to ensure all key areas of study are covered. These include:
The “11 Plus” is a selective examination, set by state grammar schools in England, as a way of determining which children should be selected to enter their schools in Year 7. The 11+ examination is not required for entry into comprehensive schools.
As places at the existing grammar schools are at a premium, the only way of securing a place is through your child reaching a high enough mark in the selection test, which each grammar school sets. It is estimated that approximately 100,000 children sit the 11+ exam in England each year for around 15,000 places, giving each child a 1 in 6 chance of gaining a place. In some schools the ratio is even greater with a 1 in 10 chance of gaining entry.
A brief history of the 11+
After the 1944 Education Act, secondary schooling in the United Kingdom was rearranged into three types of Secondary schools – Grammar Schools, Secondary Modern Schools and Technical Schools or Colleges. Each school was designed to fit in with the child’s capablities, so a grammar school would suit those who were academic and wanted to go onto university, whilst a Technical School suited those who wished to pursue a trade, with a Secondary Modern fitting somewhere in between. All children took the 11+ exam in their final year of primary school and based on their performance in this exam, they would then go onto one of these three types of secondary school.
However it was thought that this system was not fair on the less academic children as funding was biased towards the grammar schools and so by the 1960s a comprehensive system of education as introduced where all children were to be treated fairly and would all attend the same type of secondary school. This led to the rapid decline of Grammar Schools; some elected to become private grammar schools, some changed to comprehensives and some remained as grammar schools.
Grammar schools invariably do well in the League Tables for secondary schools and their Ofsted reports are usually very impressive.
You can buy our 11+ papers here