After diabetes  diagnosis,  many type 1 and type 2 diabetics worry about their  life expectancy.
Death is never a pleasant subject but it's  human nature to want to know 'how long can I expect to live'.
There is no  hard and fast answer to the question of ‘how long can I expect to live’ as a  number of factors influence one’s life expectancy.
How soon diabetes was  diagnosed, the progress of diabetic complications and whether one has other  existing conditions will all contribute to one’s life expectancy - regardless of  whether the person in question has type 1 or type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes UK estimates in its report, Diabetes in the UK 2010: Key Statistics on Diabetes[5],  that the life expectancy of someone with type 2 diabetes is likely to be  reduced, as a result of the condition, by up to 10 years.
People with type 1 diabetes have traditionally lived shorter lives, with life expectancy having been quoted as being reduced by over 20 years.
However, improvement in diabetes care in recent decades indicates that people with type 1 diabetes are now living significantly longer.
Results of a 30 year study by the University of Pittsburgh, published in 2012, noted that people with type 1 diabetes born after 1965 had a life expectancy of 69 years.[76]
The Office  for National Statistics estimates life expectancy amongst new births to be:
Amongst those who are currently 65  years old, the average man can expect to live until 83 years old and the  average woman to live until 85 years old.
Higher  blood sugars over a period of time allow diabetic complications to set in, such  as:
Higher  blood sugars can often be accompanied by associated conditions such as
Both help to contribute to poor  circulation and further the damage to organs such as the heart, kidneys, eyes  and nerves in particular.
In some  cases, short term complications such as hypoglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis can also be fatal.
Statistically diabetes results in lower life  expectancy than people without diabetes. However, it is not all doom and gloom  and there are steps you can take which can help to increase your likelihood of  living longer.
The bad news is that average life expectancy for  people with diabetes is shorter than people without diabetes. Diabetes UK’s  annual report on diabetes in the UK states:
That sounds very depressing but there are some factors  that also need to be considered.
The statistics are based on historical figures from  times when people with type 1 diabetes
lacked access to blood glucose  monitoring. With the much better access to self monitoring these days, life  expectancy of current generations may well improve. These days, people with  type 2 diabetes are getting diagnosed earlier in the development of diabetes  which, with good diabetes control, may also help to improve long term life  expectancy.
The following  factors can be a significant help towards keeping healthy and living longer:
Your health team should check your progress on each of  these at least once each year.
There are other guidelines provided by the NHS that contribute  to living a longer and healthier life, including:
Maintaining  good blood glucose control is a key way to prolong the length of your life.
Keeping blood sugar levels within the recommended blood  glucose level ranges will help to offset the likelihood of the complications  and therefore increase life expectancy.
It is  highly recommended to enjoy a healthy lifestyle, of a well balanced diet and  regular activity, in order to help keep blood pressure and cholesterol at  healthy levels and promote good blood circulation.
People with  type 1 diabetes will, in the majority of cases, develop diabetes at a younger age  than those with type 2 diabetes, therefore they will usually spend a longer  period of their life living with the condition.
However, there is good news - people with type 1  diabetes have been known to live for as long as over 85 years with the  condition. As noted  above, recent studies into life expectancy are showing significant improvement  in life expectancy rates for people with type 1 diabetes born later in the  20th century.
As noted above, recent studies into life expectancy are showing significant improvement in life expectancy rates for people with type 1 diabetes born later in the twentieth century.
Generally  type 2 diabetes develops more slowly than type 1 diabetes.
As a result, some  people can be diagnosed with type 2 diabetes (and some other diabetes types)  years after they first developed the condition. In some cases diabetes may only  be diagnosed after noticing the signs of diabetic complications which is a  serious position.
It is not  fair to judge which condition is more serious, all types of diabetes have a  serious impact on people’s health and it is a difficult condition which takes a  lot of time, persistence and care to manage.