In this section we give you our own assessment of the Top 100 independent senior schools in the UK for 2016. These positions are compiled from the % of A* and A at A levels. These tables also include Pre-U grades from D1 to M1
We specialise in advising parents on the best schools to target for their children so please contact us for a free consultation to discuss your child's education on +44 1622 813870 or by completing an Enquiry Form.
Click on the name of a school to find out its type, contact details, day or boarding and the annual fees.
Click on the arrows to the right of each column to reorder the table by category e.g. size of school fees, alphabetical order, exam scores etc.
Note.1. Sometimes there are a few gaps in our data, because the information is not freely available or a school will not supply it. In general this applies to lower graded schools in the TOP 100. Sometimes grades improve as a result of appeals on exam results and we may update the data periodically, as long it does not distort the results of schools which have not given us their remarks. We encourage all schools to supply corrections or additions (click here). Approximately 60 schools have boycotted league tables by refusing to publish exam results, mainly because they do not want to be compared to state schools offering soft option subjects or through failure of the Government to acknowledge the more stretching IGCSEs. Notwithstanding this we have recorded most of their exam results in our tables.
Note 2. Exam results are not the only criteria by which to judge a school (read our eGuide on selection factors click here) Indeed most of the schools in this TOP 100 table are quite selective on their admissions. Be aware your child may not necessarily thrive in a high pressure academic environment - take advice.
Note 3. We do not include schools which have less than 20 pupils taking A Levels.
Note: We make a substantial investment of time and effort in preparing these tables, and all copyright and database rights in the tables belong to us. Please respect this by not reproducing the tables or the information within them, in whole or in part, without our consent. If you wish to reproduce any of our tables or the information within them then please contact us for details.