New Year  is the start of beautiful phase of life and a new beginning of new hopes, aspirations and dreams. It is one of the most popular occasions which is celebrated by everyone. On this day, people indulge in fun activities and celebrate the coming year with their loved ones. The best time to reach out to your loved ones. It is the perfect time to celebrate and exchange gifts, greetings and messages. People celebrate their New Year Eve with family and friends.New Year’s Day on January 1 is a restricted holiday in India and their is tight security in prime cities. (Read: Happy New Year 2016 Hindi: Best New Year SMS, WhatsApp & Facebook Messages to send Happy New Year greetings)
New Year signifies that finally the time has arrived to bid adieu to the on-going year and by welcoming the coming New Year. Traditionally, the New Year was celebrated on 1st March of every year but 1st January is considered to have a more religious significance. The celebration ends with colourful fireworks, dance, drinks, games and a lot more. And then comes the task of wishing everyone and sending out New Year messages. With the new age technology of social media and WhatsApp, we can quickly send messages that are an easy way to greet your loved ones and show them your love and care in a unique way.
With the New Year just round the corner, we bring to you some of the best WhatsApp messages that you can consider sending to your loved ones. Send the coolest messages, power packed with warmth and compassion just to wish them a wonderful and prosperous New Year. Welcome the New Year with lots of wine or beer, cake, celebrations and resolutions – wish you all a very Happy New Year 2016!
Whatsapp reads:  “In every thing there must be a season,  a time 2come and a time 2go. I pray that this New Year brings 2you happiness and joy 4ever and ever.”
Whatsapp reads:  My wishes for you are not limited to just the next year but to all the years that you experience in your lifetime and in your reincarnations! Have a fun-filled, smashing, rocking and happening New Years!
Whatsapp reads: New Year is not about changing the Dates but Direction; It’s not about changing the Calendar but Commitment;
It’s not about changing the Actions but Attitude; It’s not about changing the Fruit but Faith, Force and Focus! May you Commit and Create the best New Year ever!
Whatsapp reads: Lighten up your surroundings with your sweet smile and make way for happiness with your good deeds this New Year. Happy 2016.
Whatsapp reads:  Wish your Life always remains Bright throughout. Have a rocking New year.
Whatsapp reads: Lets celebrate this blissful, cheerful, colorful New year. with a smile. Wish you Happy new year.
Whatsapp reads: May each day of the coming year Be vibrant and new bringing along Many reasons for celebrations & rejoices. Happy New Year!
Whatsapp reads: Forever my warm wishes are with you, Have a promising and great new year. ‘~’~’ short new year sms/quotes 2016 ‘~’~’
Whatsapp reads: Wish you a bright, prosperous, and glorious new Year ahead. Happy new year.
Whatsapp reads:  New hopes! New resolutions! New Aspiration! Love N Laughter in your life! Peace N Prosperity in your life! Success N Good Times On New Year! Wishing you a Sparkling N Rocking New Year
Whatsapp reads: New Year be the best ever Filled with joy, love, laughter Fun, Humor, cheer! My dear happy new year
Whatsapp reads:  I wish you spend a great year ahead that starts with happiness and ends with that too. Happy New year.
Whatsapp reads: My wishes for you, great start for Jan, Love for Feb, peace for March, No worries for April, fun for May, Joy for June to Nov, happiness for Dec. Have a lucky and wonderful 2016
Whatsapp reads: Lets welcome the year which is fresh Lets welcome the year which is new, Lets cherish each moment it beholds, Lets celebrate this blissful new year.
Whatsapp reads: Wishing you a New Year that’s Sparking with Fun N Masti.. Bursting with Joy N Love… & crackling with cheers N laughter!…………………short happy new year sms
Whatsapp reads: Remember the laughter, the joy, the hard work, and the tears. And as you reflect on the past year, also think of the new one to come. Because most importantly, this is a time of new beginnings and the celebration of life.” Happy New Year .
Whatsapp reads: May The Year 2016 Bring for You…. Happiness,Success and filled with Peace, Hope & Togetherness of your Family & Friends…. Wishing You a…*HAPPY NEW YEAR 2016*
Whatsapp reads: Sparkling Crackers Colorful Night Sweetest Bite Smiling Faces Delicious Dishes Only Luv, No Fear Let’s Welcome the New Year. Happy New Year
Whatsapp reads: Happy New Year Let’s forget past mistakes making amends for this year Sending you these greetings to bring you hope and cheer Happy New Year!
Whatsapp reads:  I am sending you a gift packed with Sincerity, sealed with love and engulfed in care. Bless you. Happy New Year.