Volume 59, Number 3-- October 2000
For the first time in nearly seven decades of Illinois
Potable Water Supply Operators Association conferences, both the Operator
of the Year and one of two runners up in the same category work at the
same water treatment plant. Jim Hughes, operator of the Hazel Crest
plant, was named "Operator of the Year" in the distribution-only category,
and Jerry Davis, of the same plant, was a runner-up. Hughes resides
in Homewood; Davis is a Hazel Crest resident. Alan Ohlendorf, of Beecher,
operator of the Flossmoor plant, was the other runner-up in that division.
During the group's 69th annual conference Sept. 13-15
in Springfield, the IPWSOA gave its annual recognition to nine Illinois
drinking water plant operators for their efforts in providing plentiful,
safe drinking water to users. The event is co-sponsored by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, which oversees operations of approximately
1,800 public water supplies serving Illinois.
Also selected for recognition in 2000 as Operators of
the Year were Greg Swanson, of Moline, in the surface water category
and Dean Gorter, Marengo, for supplies using groundwater. This year's
other runners-up were Roger Hobbs, Flora, and Cynthia Munger, Peotone,
in the surface water category; Ron Erickson, Momence, and Don McCauley,
Wyoming, in the ground water category.
Peers rate, computer picks winners
"Operator of the Year" is the highest professional honor
operators can receive in recognition of service and performance in the
waterworks industry. The professional organization selects an "Operator
of the Year" in groundwater, surface water and distribution categories
each year, and usually designates two runners-up in each category.
Nominees are interviewed by a selection committee during
a fly-around of the state. Nominees are rated according to a numeric
system by committee members, and results are then tallied, and winners
selected, by computer.
Swanson, a water professional for more than 23 years,
is water plant manager for the Moline water supply, pumping an average
of 5.7 million gallons a day to 16,536 service connections. Gorter supervises
a plant providing Carpentersville with an average three million gallons
a day to 8,500 services. Hughes is chief operator for the Hazel Crest
water treatment plant and also serves part time at the plants serving
the city of Harvey and the Olympia Fields Country club. The Hazel Crest
plant provides an average 1.5 million gallons daily.
Davis, runner up in the distribution category, initiated
an upgrade to the SCADA System which has saved approximately $5000 a
year in overtime while allowing staff to devote more time to maintenance.
Of the runners-up in the surface water category, Hobbs
is chief operator for a plant pumping an average 700,000 gallons a day
from the Little Wabash River and Munger heads up operations at a plant
constructed in 1886 and last expanded in 1967. As production manager
for the combined Kankakee/Will counties division, she is also responsible
for an activated sludge plant in University Park, a smaller activated
sludge plant in Plumcreek and a wastewater lagoon.
Ohlendorf is utility technician for the water supply serving
the village of Flossmoor with purchased water, and is also responsible
for maintaining six underground sewage lift stations. Erickson is chief
operator for the 3.2 mgd Park Forest Municipal water treatment plant.
McCauley's Wyoming plant averages 170,000 gallons a day.
He is also operator for Princeville's new reverse osmosis water treatment
plant, and has been acting as consultant during construction of a new
plant, which he will supervise, for Bradford.
Honorees were recognized and presented with trophies during
the annual recognition banquet at the Crowne Plaza Hotel. Nominees were
announced at the end of the dinner, and members and guests then adjourned
to a tent on the grounds for the evening's spectacular conclusion. En
route each was presented with a straw hat, symbolizing the event's Fall
Festival theme.
Nearly all of the nine operators honored also find time
to be active in church, community and professional activities.