The hotly-anticipated game at Ewood Park, which comes exactly a week before the all-decisive second leg at St Mary’s, sees Martin Hunter’s side make the long trip up to Lancashire to face Rovers.
And after seeing his youngsters go down 3-2 to Sunderland last week despite a spirited second-half fightback, Saints’ Technical Director is expecting no quarter to be given by this week’s hosts, who required extra time to beat Reading 2-1 to book their place in the final.
“Everybody’s chomping at the bit really,” Hunter told Southampton’s official YouTube channel. “Training’s gone well after Monday – we’ve put that to bed – and everybody’s delighted and looking forward to the two-legged final.
“We’re expecting a very tough contest – they’re a very well-organised team. I noticed that four of their players that have been involved were on the bench (on Wednesday night against Liverpool) in the FA Cup – three of them play regularly – and we know how resilient and hard-working they are, so we need to be ready for that.
“They’ve got some good young players. I’ve known the coach there for years – he’s a very committed and passionate man, so we need to be beginning with all guns blazing really.”
Southampton will welcome Eric Kinder’s side to the south coast a week on Monday, and Hunter says the bonus of playing in front of your own fans in the second leg is one that could help give his team the edge.
And though Rovers have won just three of their 18 league fixture so far this campaign, Southampton’s Under-21 boss insists the nature of cup football – so often a release from the rigours of the league for clubs – means that they will go into the tie as equals.
“Yes, it’s always good to play the second leg at home, but playing at Ewood Park will not be easy, and the players understand that,” said Hunter.
“They’ve won four ties to get to the final, so they’re there on merit. The league form, we don’t look at that, we look at the sorts of players they’ve got, the system of play that they’ve got, and ready to combat what they throw at us and play our style of football.
“We’ve talked about that – we need a really positive reaction from all the players, and hopefully we’ll get that on Monday evening.”
It’s been just over a month since Ryan Seager’s hat-trick and one from Sam Gallagher gave Southampton a thrilling 4-2 win over Derby County in the semi-final, and Saints defender Will Wood says the four-week break from cup action has had no detrimental effect on the excitement within the camp.
“We’ve not forgotten about it, but it was done – ‘we’re in the final so we’ve got to concentrate on the league more now’,” he explained. “Obviously now the final’s coming up, everybody’s really focusing and training well to get into the team, so I think everybody will be fighting for their places and it should be a good game.
“Hopefully we can get a result away which will make it easier at home. If we don’t then we know that we can play well at St Mary’s, I don’t think there’s been a game when we haven’t played well at St Mary’s – so I’m looking forward to it.
“I think we’ll try and focus on what we’ve got to do in the first game, and then obviously in the second one it’s just what comes really, I suppose.
“We’ve got something to prove, obviously with the Sunderland game, we’ve really got something to prove, so I think if we play well against Blackburn on Monday then I think we can really get a good result and push on to the St Mary’s leg, which we’re all looking forward to.”