Children as young as six are arriving without their parents at British ports to claim asylum, members of the House of Lords have been told.
The news emerged as local authority officials gave evidence to a Lords committee on unaccompanied child asylum seekers.
A dramatic rise of up to 60% in the numbers of unaccompanied children seeking asylum in Kent since last year has created enormous pressure on local authorities finding placements and accommodation, the peers heard.
Andrew Ireland, the corporate director of social care at Kent county council, called for a nationwide dispersal system so that local authorities at ports of entry were not disproportionately affected. He warned that the number of lone children arriving was set to increase from this month as the international migration crisis continued.
“It has been extremely difficult over the last 12 months,” Ireland told the House of Lords EU home affairs subcommittee.
Kent county council is currently looking after 830 lone children seeking asylum, an increase of 60% compared with last year and has been forced to send children to other areas.
Dover district council has seen a 50% increase over the last 18 months, peers were told.
“My concern ... is that we are at the beginning of the season where the number of arrivals traditionally starts to increase,” said Ireland.
“If we see a significant increase in numbers of arrivals without a national scheme in place it is going to place a huge burden on one particular local authority, albeit one of the largest local authorities.”
Ireland said the issue of proper health screening was “very important” as many children who arrived in Kent had travelled from conflict zones, with horrendous stories and were suffering post-traumatic stress.
The majority of unaccompanied children seeking asylum in Britain arrive via the Channel tunnel from the French ports of Calais and Dunkirk and from Holland via Harwich. Those who had arrived after being in the Calais camp would have been living in “very difficult conditions” he said.
Ireland said that he was concerned over “child protection activity” in other EU nations, when children – “some 13, 14, some as young as six” – had recently arrived in Dover or through the Channel tunnel. He said that the six-year-old was “very exceptional”.
Dr Paul Chadwick, of Croydon borough council in south London, added: “It does raise questions for us how other member EU countries are fulfilling their child protection obligations when they allow the free movement of these children where there are clearly concerns about their identity and it is left to the UK authorities to try to resolve that when the child arrives.”
Concerns have also been raised about possible sexual exploitation in schools, the panel was told.
Chadwick said there could be difficulties with schools around age assessments. “That schools are concerned about the possible sexual exploitation of pupils by adults who are claiming to be children and placed in school,” he said. “I think that’s a very real concern.”
An unaccompanied asylum-seeking child is defined as someone who is under 18 and who has no relative or guardian in the UK. The UK Border Agency has responsibility for age assessments.
Councils have a duty to care for under-18s who arrive in their area and are also responsible for costs including schooling, foster care, college fees and housing. They receive funding per child from central government.
Nationally, 1,080 unaccompanied children claimed asylum in the last three months of last year, equivalent to 11 per day.