And unlike City’s punishment, there would be no writing off of two-thirds of that fine if certain targets are hit; theirs is a non-negotiable penalty, hanging over them ever since they were relegated 12 months ago.
The story behind such a swingeing sanction is as controversial as it is complex and dates back to 2011-12, QPR’s first year back in the Premier League since 1996 and their first under owner Tony Fernandes.
It was also the year the Football League introduced FFP, the primary penalty for which was straightforward enough: a transfer embargo for any club found in breach of the rules.
However, with no jurisdiction to impose such an embargo on teams promoted to the Premier League, a ‘Fair Play Tax’ was devised as a draconian deterrent to those prepared to risk everything to get to the promised land.
It was also destined to penalise those prepared to risk everything to stay there – if they ultimately fell short. QPR did just that last season, spending far beyond their means to stave off relegation only to slump back into the Championship on the back of £65.4 million losses, £177.1 million of debt and a wage bill bigger than those of Atlético Madrid and Borussia Dortmund.
And while their 2012-13 accounts are not assessed under FFP, this season’s will be – hence why promotion could be such a poisoned chalice.
The author of the website financialfairplay.co.uk, who predicted QPR’s 2012-13 losses to within a few million pounds, has estimated how poisonous it could get. Ed Thompson estimates they will lose £40 million to £50 million this season, which would mean a Fair Play Tax of £28.7 million to £38.7 million should they be promoted.
Of course, they could easily pay such a fine from the £80 million they are likely to net from returning to the Premier League, but such a sanction would put them at an incredible disadvantage in trying to stay there.
The realisation of this may be what prompted them to join forces with the likes of Leicester and Blackburn in February to issue a threat of legal action against the Football League over its FFP rules.
The club have since refused to comment on that threat, whether it still exists, and whether they plan to fight any Fair Play Tax should they win the play-off final.
The Football League insists there is no prospect of the rules being changed for this season, despite making efforts to relax its restrictions for next term. That followed pressure from the Premier League, which has expressed serious misgivings about such sanctions in their current form.
However, the difficulty of getting even minor amendments agreed was demonstrated this week when not enough Championship clubs voted to change the status quo.
Some of QPR’s rivals believe the club have only got themselves to blame for their current plight, having been fully aware of the Football League’s FFP rules when they splurged tens of millions on the likes of Julio Cesar, Park Ji-sung, Esteban Granero, Jose Bosingwa, Christopher Samba and Loïc Rémy in their desperate attempt to stay up.
Wigan chairman Dave Whelan, whose side were relegated alongside Rangers, told The Daily Telegraph: “It’s no good saying, ‘We didn’t know we were going to go down’. Every team faces that possibility of getting relegated. So we’re all in the same boat. The rules, I think, are fair. Everybody knows them and everybody should abide by them.”
Rangers have tried to rebalance the books since their relegation, selling or loaning out their biggest earners and making virtually no permanent signings in the transfer window.
They have also mortgaged their parachute payments as they forge ahead with ambitious plans to build a new stadium and training ground.
Fernandes has pledged his commitment to the club, insisting their debts were owed to their own shareholders, including Lakshmi Mittal, one of the world’s richest men.
That commitment will be tested if their fine stands, particularly if the Premier League refuses to exempt it from its own FFP calculations – something that has yet to be decided.
Whatever the consequences, promotion on Saturday is far preferable to the alternative: another season in the Championship and the prospect of a transfer embargo.