Various sources across the internet have exposed a HUGE celebrity secret to erase wrinkles - without botox or surgery!
How do Hollywood starlets look so radiant and youthful well into
thier 40's, 50's, and even 60's? Is it always expensive botox and
dangerous  plastic surgery? According to various sources, the answer is NO! So if
they aren't all using surgery to stay looking great, what is their
secret? Keep reading, it's excitingly effective, safe, and cheap!
A high profile doctor has been giving advice to clients (rumoured to include celebrities) to look 10 to 15 years younger fast, but are scared of the potential risks of surgery or botox. Many online sources have expressed suprise over how shockingly simple, cheap, and effective his technique was! Read on...
“Countless aging celebs are reported to have admitted they avoided surgery and look 20 years younger thanks to the simple advice.”
The wrinkle secret has been reserved for high paying celebrity clients...until now. Consumers have reported throwing away thousands of dollars on expensive anti aging products or dangerous surgical procedures that make big promises that often do far more harm than good. As a result, a few weeks ago this simple solution was shared!
This anti aging miracle was reportedly found when multiple celebrity friends and clients were constantly reaching out to a high profile doctor hoping for a solution to look younger to prolong their career without going in for surgery.
The doctor was reported to have been thrilled when after months and months of pain staking tests and research, his team came across 2 products that when combined supposedly took 10 to 20 years off women’s appearance in just a month. More shockingly it is safe, and  costs next to nothing to try! The two products are Dermagen iQ Anti-Ageing Cream and Expert Lift iQ Eye Serum.
“This is the anti aging miracle of the decade as far as I'm concerned.”
1.  Vitamin C
2.  Hyaluronic Acid
These are both natural ingredients that work together to erase
wrinkles and fine lines at the cellular level – below the surface of the
skin – which is why they’re so effective.
Vitamin C, The Fountain of Youth:
The first piece of the anti aging puzzle discovered was Vitamin C.
"Vitamin C is the secret to cheat your age”
Vitamin C penetrates deep into damaged skin and stimulates new
collagen – a protein which makes skin appear plump and firm. It's all
the rage in beauty circles, much in part because of a 2009 study
stating, applying non-prescription  Vitamin C to your skin  caused a large reduction in fine lines and wrinkles. This is why Dermagen iQ Anti-Ageing Cream is so effective. It was one of the few products on the market that had Vitamin C in the right consistency and dosage.
Hyaluronic Acid:
He said the second piece, when combined properly with Vitamin C, can make your face look two decades younger in weeks! Hyaluronic
Acid works by binding to moisture. It can hold up to 1,000 times its
weight in water, making it an excellent natural skin plumper. Hyaluronic
acid helps your skin repair and regenerate itself after suffering from
dryness, environmental stresses, or irritation. Products you can buy over the counter with an effective
concentration of Hyaluronic Acid was found in Expert Lift iQ Eye Serum .
“What Vitamin C & Hyaluronic Acid do is get rid of all the old, dead layers of skin and help your skin
generate fresh new ones. Our research shows that you can erase almost 10 to
20 years off your face in less than 14 days. But the key is to choose
the creams and serums that contain the highest and purest quality
ingredients, since they’re not all the same. The only two we found during our research was Dermagen iQ Anti-Ageing Cream and Expert Lift iQ Eye Serum. This is what my wife uses. This is what I recommend to all my celebrity clients.”
It's actually very simple. You simply use both products before bed. Dermagen iQ Anti-Ageing Cream and Expert Lift iQ Eye Serum.
These two products both contain high concentrations of pure Vitamin C
and Hyaluronic Acid in just the right concentrations. His team is also reported to have discovered
that they contain all sorts of anti-oxidants, an ingredient called
Dermaxyl (also known as facelift in a jar) and Ester-C (the active
anti-aging compound in Vitamin C).
As excited as we were, we wanted to find an example of real usage of these type of products. We found one test where a volunteer from the office was used. A 57 year old mother of 3 jumped at the chance to test this combo and the results were pulished online. Here is her story...
"Brenda is a 57 year old mother of 3 from here in Chicago. Like most
women her age, the years have started to give her unwanted lines and
wrinkles. Brenda said she volunteered because she is so frustrated that
nothing she has tried seems to work. She was even considered highly
risky and very expensive facelift procedure. This was somewhat of a last
resort for her."
Here are the reported results from the source....
"After the first day of using Dermagen iQ Anti-Ageing Cream and Expert Lift iQ Eye Serum together,
I was surprised at how wonderful they both made my skin feel. It felt
like every last pore on my face was being tightened and pulled by a
gigantic vacuum cleaner.
I don't know how else to describe it! I could feel a warm tingling
sensation on my cheeks, around my eyes, and on my forehead. I looked in
the mirror and saw that my face looked a bit rosy - the result of
revitalizing blood rushing to the surface of my skin to renew my face.
After both products were absorbed into my skin, my face looked firmer and had a beautiful glow to it."
"After five days of using Dermagen iQ Anti-Ageing Cream and Expert Lift iQ Eye Serum, I was shocked at the drastic results.
The lines, dark spots, and wrinkles - without question - were visibly reduced in size right before my eyes!
I was astonished by the results, and literally felt 15 years younger
again. It was like watching all my wrinkles and fine lines vanish right off!"
"After 14 days, not only had all my doubts and scepticism absolutely vanished - SO DID MY WRINKLES!
The lines on my forehead, the loose, sagging skin on my neck, my crows’ feet – even the age spots on my face had
COMPLETELY disappeared. I've never felt or seen anything tighten my skin
with this kind of force before, no matter how expensive the product!
After the 2 weeks, my skin not only stayed that
way, it actually improved every day until it became as beautiful and
radiant as it was 20 years ago. By this point, all my
friends and family were shocked. They couldn't believe the difference,
and were convinced I was lying about not getting botox!"
Pictures of Brenda Wright at day 1, day 5 & day 14. The picture at the bottom was taken after only 14 days of using Dermagen iQ Anti-Ageing Cream and Expert Lift iQ Eye Serum.
Using the Dermagen iQ Anti-Ageing Cream and Expert Lift iQ Eye Serum combo,
removed virtually 90% of all her wrinkles and problem areas. It
tightened her face and neck, removing all signs of sagging, aging, and
dehydrated skin.
There are plenty of skincare gimmicks out there, and most of them are
ridiculously expensive. With so many options it’s only natural for you
to be skeptical about the results, and so we don't want to promise our
readers anything, we simply want to challenge you to do what the doctor has recommended: try it for yourself!
Remember, the published reports suggest you need to use both Dermagen iQ Anti-Ageing Cream and Expert Lift iQ Eye Serum in combination for best results.
For your convenience, we have provided the links to the exact products recommended. As of the writing of this article they are still
offering Free Trials of both Dermagen iQ Anti-Ageing Cream and Expert Lift iQ Eye Serum. Use the links below and you will get the lowest possible shipping price as well.