Tottenham v Brighton  Stoke City v Southampton Bournemouth v West Brom Shrewsbury Town v Chelsea Liverpool v Swansea  MK Dons v Sheffield United  Manchester City v Crystal Palace/Newcastle  Fulham v Derby County
And that concludes the draw for the fourth round of the Capital One Cup. Ties will be played on the week beginning Oct 27 though if you're not careful they could pass by without you noticing at all.
21.47 In the Sky studio Glenn Hoddle seems to have started referring to fellow pundit Jermaine Jenas simply as 'Jenas'. I'm not sure how I feel about this
21.41 Standby for the fourth round draw. It's coming up any minute now. Here are the teams in the giant metal hat for the last 16 ...
Southampton Sheffield United Bournemouth Stoke City Derby County Liverpool MK Dons Swansea Shrewsbury Town Fulham Chelsea Crystal Palace/Newcastle Manchester City Brighton Tottenham West Brom/Hull
Full time: Tottenham 3 Nottingham Forest 1 Spurs go through to the fourth round but it took Forest going ahead to stir any signs of life from Pochettino's side. After an abysmal opening 45 minutes the second half really picked up and we got four excellent goals with Ryan Mason making a star turn from the bench.
90+3 min: It's very nearly a fourth for Spurs which would be as harsh on the Forest players as if Stuart Pearce tells them they have to walk home because they lost. It's Lamela who shoots from distance but it hits the outside of the post
Goal! Tottenham 3 Nottingham Forest 1 (Kane 90) Spurs have wrapped it up and it's another lovely goal. Mason pings it to Lamela, who weaves infield and plays a textbook 'straight ball to a diagonal run'. Kane is the one making that run and he steadies himself before firing across De Vries and into the bottom corner.
90 min: Four minutes of stoppage time but Forest seem to have run out of ideas a little bit. Here's an idea: one last attack?
88 min: Two minutes plus stoppage time. Can Forest do a Middlesbrough? Can Fazio do a Kolo Toure?
86 min: Final Forest change: Oliver Burke comes on for Jorge Grant.
85 min: Everyone wants a pot-shot now. Naughton fires a low one from distance but De Vries smothers it.
84 min: Roberto Soldado is going to quit while he's ahead: He's replaced by Erik Lamela.
Goal! Tottenham 2 Nottingham Forest 1 (Soldado 82) Roberto Soldado has scored with - you've guessed it - a one-touch finish. Mason is involved again rolling the ball into the path of Townsend who takes a touch and shoots. His shot looks to be going wide but Soldado sticks out a foot and deflects it into the net. Nice finish from the Spaniard. The kind of goal we thought we'd see much more of when he joined Spurs from Valencia.
80 min: Really sloppy from Wilson and Townsend pounces. He's forced wide before cutting back on his left but he can't beat Fox with his cross.
77 min: Townsend comes again, ignoring the run of Lennon who comes in off the flank taking defenders with him. It doesn't quite open up for him as much as he would like and his shot is blocked.
75 min: Free kick to Spurs at the edge of the area. No vanishing spray in the Capital Onbe Cup so we have no idea how far away the wall is.Townsend stands over it ... and crashes a beautiful curling effort off the top of the crossbar.
74 min: Poor Soldado ...
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Andrew Thomas - Did ... did Soldado go to smash it into the net again, but hit the post?&lt;/noframe&gt;
72 min: Stuart Pearce makes a swift change: Dexter Blackstock comes on for Veldwijk.
Goal! Tottenham 1 Nottingham Forest 1 (Mason 71) What a strike from Ryan Mason! He's 25 yards out and hits a dripping swerving shot which gives De Vries no chance and lands in the top right corner.
70 min: Vertonghen shoots from distance but a Forest body is in the way. Davies picks up the loose ball, sends a lovely ball from ther left. Kane has lost his marker but plants his header straight into De Vries' arms.
69 min: Lovely one touch football from Forest on the right comes to an end when Osborn tries a little shuffle but ends up knocking the ball out of play.
67 min: Soldado finally comes alive. And by 'alive' I mean he shows for the ball in the right channel and wins a corner. Kane can't get his head to Davies' corner and the Mason's cross from the right is poor.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Elmander Huggenkiss - Get your Jorge Grant name by combining a Portugal centre-back and a West Ham manager. Mine's Bruno Curbishley.&lt;/noframe&gt;
65 min: The youngster Mason is straight into the thick of it latching onto Soldado's flick and firing across goal but no one is there. Townsend rescues the ball at the back post and crosses but Wilson heads clear.
63 min: Double change for Spurs: Harry Kane and Ryan Mason come on for Paulinho and Stambouli, who can argue about which one of them was worse from the dugout.
Goal! Tottenham 0 Nottingham Forest 1 (Grant 61) Forest have been the better team in this half and now they have a deserved lead. Veldwijk does well to nod the ball into the path of McLaughlin. His shot is blocked and looks to be going out for a corner. Instead Veldwijk chases it down, sends in a low cross from the left which McLaughlin tries to backheel goalwards. Instead he takes the pace off the cross leaving Jorge Grant with the simple task of side-footing hom from five yards.
57 min: It very nearly opens up for Osborn but his touch is poor and he's forced hilself wide. he wins a corner which Paterson takes, Harding heads and it's not very far away at all, taking a deflection off a Spurs defender on the way. The second corner comes to nothing.
56 min: Paulinho very nearly opens the scoring with a very clever half-flick, half-karate kick from a Ben Davies cross. Lovely effort from Paulinho. Maybe he is Brazilian after all.
55 min: The draw is coming up after this game. See, I told you there would be something to look forward to. That and the epic 32 goal penalty.
52 min: By the look of Forest's second half desplay so far I think the expression 'this lot are there for the taking' may have been used once or twice in their dressing room at half time.
50 min: Paterson is down after what looked like a clean tackle from Naughton. It all came from a careless pass from Stambouli which presented the ball to the Forest midfielder who ran at the Spurs defence until Naughton intervened. There's no free kick and Paterson is going to be fine.
46 min: Forest on the front foot in the early stages. McLughlin wins the ball well in midfield and finds Veldwijk on the left. he rolls it into the path of Osborn, who takes a touch and shoots from distance but it's nowhere near as sweetly struck as his first half effort and it drifts wide of Vorm's left hand post.
Peep! Forest restart. Peace has brought on Robert Tesche in place of David Vaughan.
20.44 The teams are back out on the pitch. Let's see if either of them found a striker hiding in a broom cupboard in the dressing room.
An email! This should liven things up. Shane O'Leary writes: "I don't want to be funny, that's your job, or the thing that Man Utd do so well, but I can't help thinking that a green jumper is more Tits-Marsh than Clough and if the Forest fans really want to pay tribute to and remember Brian as he truly was, shouldn't they be punching each other in the mouth, quite a lot?"
He did more than just slap a few people, Shane. He said some great things to. Here are some of his best.
Half time: Tottenham 0 Nottingham Forest 0. I'm sorry.
44 min: A vintage Andros Townsend moment: he flies down the right flank, cuts inside one then two tackles but drags his left footed shot wide of the post. That's what he's all about, that Andros Townsend.
40 min: Stambouli and Townsend link up on the right. Townsend twists and turns and eventually delivers a cross which is headed clear.
38 min: What a shot from Fazio. It's a Johnny Metgod-esque drive from distance which rises just over the crossbar. That's best thing he's done all game.
37 min: Naughton's shot from distance is blocked by Lascelles. The Spurs fall back then spreads the ball wide to Townsend who digs out a cross but De Vries comes and claims under pressure.
36 min: This game is made for Jermain Defoe.
32 min: Good cross from the right from Townsend, who is Spurs' most dangerous player so far, but there's nobody in the middle to capitalise.
31 min: Soldado has his heels clipped by Wilson and Spurs have another free kick in a promising area. Davies lofts it towards the back post but De Vries gathers.
27 min: Good effort from Andros Townsend - remember him? - from long range with his 'unfavoured' right foot but it flashes wide of De Vries' post.
25 min: Veldwijk very nearly gets in as Fazio fails to deal with a long ball from the back. The Argentine redeems himself with a sliding tackle which had to be perfect otherwise it would have been a penalty and he would have been off.
23 min: More pressure from Forest as Paterson flases the ball across the six yard box but Veldwijk is slightly off the pace and can't convert.
22 min: Very nearly a stunning opener from Ben Osborne who runs from his own half, holds off Stambouli, knocks the ball one side of Fazio and races around the other before crashing a beautiful curling shot from the edge of the area off the underside of the crossbar. Spurs fail to clear properly and Grant has an effort saved by Vorm.
21 min: Paulinho wants a penalty after a crazy attempt at a pass inside his own area from Danny Fox. The Forest defender puts a hand across the Spurs man's chest and he collapses to the ground but I think it would have been very harsh.
20 min: Forest win a corner after failing to properly deal with a long ball forward. Vaughan takes it on the left, finds Veldwijk but the whistle goes for a foul.
19 min: Rowan Ince has given Brighton taken the lead at Burton. Nice to know something has happened somewhere.
15 min: Another chance for Bentaleb to cross and again it's a poor delivery. Spurs have had 70 per cent possession but have done nowt with it. Until now anyway as Lennon scampers down the right and puts in a decent bll which Harding turns behind for a corner. This time Bentaleb's delivery is better but the end result is the same - Forest head clear.
Forest fans in their Brian Clough jumpers (ACTION IMAGES)
11 min: Spurs finally turn their possession intio an effort on goal (of sorts). A cross from the right is half cleared and vertonghen comes onto it, takes a touch but is challenged by Vaughan as he shoots. The ball spins off the Forest man's foot towards goal and De Vries has to be agile to claw away. It was most likely going wide anyway.
7 min: Another set piece for Spurs - this time a corner - after Harding takes no risks with naughton's pumped cross to the back post. Again the delivery is poor as Bentaleb doesn't get any height in the cross.
6 min: Free kick to Spurs which Paulinho tries to swing into the area. He doesn't get enough lift on the delivery however and McLaughlin boots clear.
4 min: The pattern continues as Spurs string 20 or 30 passes together around the halfway line before vertonghen loses patience, pumps one long towards Soldado who has zero interest in challenging for the ball in the air and Forest head clear.
2 min: Nothing much to report so far - Spurs knocking it about in front of Forest, who have 10 men behind the ball with Veldwijk up front on his own.
Peep! Andre Marriner blows his whistle and Tottenham get the game underway.
"Both managers took no prisoners during their playing days & played under top managers," writes John McEnerney. "It's easy to see that they learned a lot. Well organised sides and play to their strengths not complicated at all. Spurs to squeeze through!"
Here are 'the lads' in their playing days ...
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Danny Kelly - Nottingham Forest fans out in huge numbers, all wearing those green Brian Clough sweatshirts. &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23NFFC" target="_blank"&gt;#NFFC&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23Clough" target="_blank"&gt;#Clough&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
19.40 We're pretty much ready to go at White Hart Lane, though I suspect many fans have decided they'll just have one more drink in a nearby pub before taking their seat. And maybe one more quick one after that.
19.22 Pre-match scenes at White Hart Lane ...
19.20 Some highlights from a classic Spurs v Forest match of yore. Nobody mention Roger Milford's name to a Forest fan.
19.15 No need for a typed teamsheet at White Hart Lane. Not when you've handwriting this neat. But whoever's handy work this is they spelt referee Andre Marriner's name wrong ...
1,000 @Official_NFFC fans will be in green jumpers for our @CapitalOne_Cup tie in honour of Brian Clough. pic.twitter.com/fTbBsakdjA
18.50 Team news. Just the 20 changes between the two sides from Saturday's games ...
Tottenham: Vorm; Naughton, Fazio, Vertonghen, Davies; Bentaleb, Stambouli; Lennon (c), Paulinho, Townsend; Soldado.  Subs: Friedel, Chiriches, Dier, Mason, Lamela, Eriksen, Kane.
Nottingham Forest: De Vries, Fox, Wilson (c), Lascelles, Harding, McLaughlin, Vaughan, Grant, Osborn, Paterson, Veldwijk.  Subs: Darlow, Collins, Halford, Blackstock, Tesche, Walker, O. Burke.
18.45 If you're struggling to contain your excitement ahead of this clash and need some distraction then you could do worse than having a look at this. Episode 15 looks like a cracker.
18.30 Good evening folks and welcome to live coverage of Premier League relegation strugglers Tottenham Hotspur versus Championship high flyers Nottingham Forest in the midweek hostess with the mostess, the Capital One Cup.
Spurs boss Mauricio Pochettino says Sunday's defeat at home to West Brom was "a slap in the face" for his players which is handy as that was exactly what most Tottenham fans inside White Hart Lane wanted to do to them after watching the defeat.
'The Poch' has promised to ring the changes for tonight's game despite the pressing short-term need for a victory and medium-term need for a tophy so we can expect to see a similar side to the one that started the thrilling 0-0 draw versus Partizan Belgrade last week.
By contrast Nottingham Forest, under the steady hand of the punk Pep Guardiola, Stuart Pearce, are unbeaten in all competitions this season and are sitting pretty on top of the Championship. Pearce has also promised to make some changes tonight so it remains to be seen whether we will see a performance as strong as those he's been coaxing out of his players in the league.
What isn't in doubt is that the Forest fans plan to mark the 10th anniversary of Brian Clough's death by wearing green jumpers of the ilk favoured by Old Big 'Ead.
Team news and more match build-up to follow
13.15 Oh hi there. Last night's live blog from Anfield featured 31 goals. Evan Fanning will be in the blogging hotseat from White Hart Lane and he has promised tonight's tally will exceed that number. It's a bold statement but Evan is a bold man.
Nottingham Forest go into this match riding high at the top of the Championship table, while Spurs have experienced a dip in recent weeks and are now without a win in their last four matches in all competitions.
Do come back here for the pre-match action and live game a bit later and have a read of our match preview by clicking HERE.