Separated children are children aged less than 18 years who have been separated from both parents, or from their previous legal or customary primary caregiver, but not necessarily from other relatives. These may, therefore, include children accompanied by other adult family members.
Unaccompanied children are children aged less than 18 years who have been separated from both parents and other relatives and are not being cared for by an adult who, by law or custom, is responsible for doing so. [1]
While the Home Office uses the term ‘unaccompanied', this potentially excludes children who arrive with adults who are not their parents or legal or customary primary caregivers as the result of being trafficked to or smuggled into the U.K, or children placed in abusive private fostering placements. Furthermore, the term “separated” is used widely in other countries. Therefore, the information on this website often refers to “unaccompanied or separated children”.
They have often been forcibly separated from their parents or carers by events beyond their control, for example through the murder or imprisonment of their parent, the destruction of their community, or through the act of being trafficked or smuggled to the UK. They may also have been separated from their parents or caregiver during the course of their journey to the UK.
Children seek asylum because they have a genuine need for protection and are in search of safety. They may seek asylum:
As well as being subject to persecution for the same reasons as adults in their country, children may be fleeing child-specific persecution. This could include child soldiering, female circumcision and forced marriage. [2]
Why do they come to the UK?
It is very rarely the case that the level of support provided in the UK is a ‘pull factor' for asylum seekers choosing to come here. Rather, research has shown that most asylum seekers have little or no knowledge of the UK and its asylum or welfare systems, and this is particularly the case with children. People may choose the UK as a destination on account of its reputation as a safe, tolerant and democratic country, or because they have family or connections here. However, often in the case of asylum seeking children an agent brings them to the UK and so they have little choice in the matter. Often they do not realise they will end up in the UK when they leave their country. [3]
How many separated or unaccompanied asylum seeking children come to the UK a year?
In 2008, an estimated 5,500 separated children were seeking asylum and being cared for by local authorities in the UK [4], and 4,285 separated children applied for asylum in the UK during the year. [5]
The majority of separated young people seeking asylum under 18 are 16-17 years old, but a significant minority are younger than 16. In 2008, for example, 9% of unaccompanied and separated children seeking asylum in the UK were under 14, 24% were aged 14-15, and 47% were aged 16-17. The ages of 20% of the young people seeking asylum under the age of 18 were unknown. [6]
Are these children male or female?
There are more male than female children seeking asylum alone in the UK. In 2008, 85% of separated and unaccompanied children seeking asylum in the UK were male, and 15% female [7].
The majority of separated and unaccompanied asylum seeking children arrive from countries experiencing armed conflict or serious repression of minority groups or political opponents. This is demonstrated by the following figures, which list the top ten countries of origin of unaccompanied and separated children seeking asylum in the UK in 2008 [8]:
How many of these children are granted asylum?
Very few separated or unaccompanied children seeking asylum are in fact granted asylum. This might be because child-specific forms of persecution are not sufficiently recognised in the UK, or because many children are given discretionary leave instead, on the basis that there are not suitable arrangements for their care in their country of origin. In 2008, for example, in initial decisions only 8% of these children were recognised as a refugee and granted asylum. The majority, 53%, were not recognised as a refugee but were granted discretionary leave, whilst 17% of children were refused asylum and not granted leave to remain. A very small number of children (less than 1%) were granted humanitarian protection.
In total, separated and unaccompanied asylum seeking children accounted for 84% of total grants of humanitarian protection and discretionary leave to asylum seekers in 2008, despite these children only accounting for only 17% of all initial decisions. This reflects the fact that separated and unaccompanied asylum seeking children are far more likely than other groups of asylum seekers to be granted with discretionary leave. [9]
Ayotte, W., Separated children coming to Western Europe - Why they travel and how they arrive, Save the Children, 2000.
Ayotte, W. and Williamson, L., Separated Children in the UK: An overview of the current situation. Save the Children, Refugee Council, 2001.
Bhabha, J and Finch, N., Seeking Asylum Alone: Unaccompanied and Separated Children and Refugee Protection in the UK , 2006
Crawley, H., Chance or Choice? Understanding why asylum seekers come to the UK , Refugee Council, 2010.
Dennis, J., A Case for Change: How refugee children in England are missing out . Refugee Council, Save the Children, The Children's Society, 2002.
Does every child matter? Children seeking asylum in Britain . Refugee and Migrant Justice, 2009.
Dorling, K, Seeking Support: A Guide to the Rights and Entitlements of Separated Refugee and Asylum Seeking Children . The Children's Legal Centre, 2009.
General Comment No. 6: Treatment of unaccompanied and separated children outside their country of origin , The Committee on the Rights of the Child, 2005.
Tilley, K. Children who are asylum seekers or refugees . The National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC), 2008.
[1] The Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 6: Treatment of unaccompanied and separated children outside their country of origin , 2005, p.6.
[2] Bhabha, J and Finch, N (2006) Seeking Asylum Alone: Unaccompanied and Separated Children and Refugee Protection in the UK
[3] Crawley, H (2010) Chance or Choice? Understanding why asylum seekers come to the UK , London: Refugee Council.
[4] Kinney, Brian, Director, UASC Reform Programme, National Asylum Stakeholder Forum Update on UASC Reform, 24 July 2008.
[7] Home Office, Supplementary tables for 2008, including applications received for asylum in the UK from unaccompanied children . Table 2.k.