Novak Djokovic overcame a late surge to defeat Adrian Mannarino 6-4, 6-3, 7-6(5) on Wednesday and book his place in the third round of Wimbledon 2016 following another day disrupted by the elements.
Meanwhile, world No. 772 Marcus Willis saw his Wimbledon fairy tale unravel at the hands of legend Roger Federer, who defeated the Brit 6-0, 6-3, 6-4 to take his spot in the next stage of the tournament.
Earlier in the day, Austria's Dominic Thiem defeated Florian Mayer in straight sets to set up a third-round duel opposite Jiri Vesely, who cruised past Igor Sijsling with a 6-2, 6-5, 7-6(7) victory to advance.
There were also victories for Tomas Berdych and Bernard Tomic, who edged narrow wins over Ivan Dodig and Fernando Verdasco, respectively, following rain delays at SW19.
Britain's Johanna Konta strode to a 6-1, 7-5 triumph over Monica Puig, but Heather Watson will have to wait to find out her Wimbledon fate. She was trailing Annika Beck 1-0 in the third set of the pair's draw before rain suspended play.
Agnieszka Radwanska and Petra Kvitova were among the victors in the women's tournament, while the likes of Simona Halep, Carla Suarez Navarro and Madison Keys saw their matches delayed until Thursday.
Read on for a roundup of Wednesday's scores and a breakdown of the key statistics emerging from the latest results at Wimbledon 2016.
For a breakdown of the day's results in full, visit the official Wimbledon website.
While a straight-sets scoreline might have suggested Djokovic's win over Mannarino was one-sided, the Frenchman could hold his head high following a defiant performance against the world No. 1.
This was a significant victory for the Serb too, as it handed Djokovic yet another landmark streak, per the official Wimbledon Twitter account, and kept alive his hunt for a third successive title at SW19:
Novak Djokovic sets a new Open Era record... 👏
He downs Adrian Mannarino 6-4 6-3 7-6(5) to reach the 3R #Wimbledon pic.twitter.com/LigIccZqll
Mannarino was an especially tough customer in the first and third set. He managed to force a tiebreak in the latter and conceded a total of just three breaks across the match—not a bad record given the opposition.
But as giants soared, minnows fell by the wayside on Wednesday as Federer ended the fairy-tale run of surprise second-round qualifier Willis, who soaked up the Wimbledon atmosphere after taking his leave:
Roger Federer hangs back to let Marcus Willis soak up the crowd's applause.#Wimbledon https://t.co/Wby6YU4bIz
Federer beat the 25-year-old Slough native in straight sets and ultimately blew him out of the water. But there were signs of real competition at times, and Willis even mustered as many aces (nine) as Federer, per the official Wimbledon website.
Early on Wednesday, Berdych finally booked his spot in the second round after getting better of Dodig with a 7-6(5), 5-7, 6-1, 7-62) victory, with ESPN Tennis noting the Czech upstart is hoping for another Wimbledon final:
Game, Set, Match Berdych. Former #Wimbledon finalist is through to 2R with 7-6(5) 5-7 6-1 7-6(2) win over Dodig. pic.twitter.com/YHwnGk5qfE
That may be a stretch too far for Berdych given his struggles against Dodig at times, and Australia's Tomic also had to fight tooth and nail for his 4-6, 6-3, 6-3, 3-6, 6-4 win against Spain's Verdasco.
The No. 19 seed had to contest a particularly close game close to the end of the decisive fifth set, per Live Tennis, and the reward for his perseverance is a second-round matchup against Radu Albot:
#Tomic saves 5 break points in 7-deuce game to move ahead 5-3. And players are coming off. pic.twitter.com/LHiItOCwyS
Romanian Albot defeated Gastao Elias 3-6, 6-2, 7-5, 6-4 to progress, joining the likes of Thiem and Vesely in the next phase after they scored wins against Mayer and Sijsling, respectively.
The women had slightly more fortune finishing matches on Wednesday, despite the conditions, and 21st seed Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova was among the first to advance to the second round after beating Su-Wei Hsieh 7-5, 1-6, 6-1.
Czech Republic's Kvitova, who was close to seamless in her 6-0, 6-4 hammering of Romania's Sorana Cirstea, will join her in the next phase, and she'll face the victor of the clash between Ekaterina Makarova and Johanna Larsson.
Radwanska's 6-2, 6-1 battering of Ukrainian Kateryna Kozlova was arguably the most one-sided result of the day, however, upholding a dominant Wimbledon record for the world No. 3:
Agnieszka Radwanska's 1R record at #Wimbledon:22 sets played22 sets won
Plenty of reason to celebrate 💪 https://t.co/GJXmBTJPWM
British No. 2 Watson started brightly against Beck and won the first set 6-3 before crumbling to a 6-0 trouncing in the second, with everything left to play for on Thursday.
In the men's competition, Kei Nishikori and Milos Raonic saw their fixtures delayed against Julien Benneteau and Andreas Seppi, respectively. It's scheduled to now get underway on Thursday.