Such a splendid World Cup required a fabulous end, although the final was not a classic. Lionel Messi vomited in the first half, and never looked close to his peak. Gonzalo Higuaín and Rodrigo Palacio missed fine chances.
At the final whistle, Argentina were a mix of dignified and bereft in defeat. Their coach, Alejandro Sabella, walked across to Joachim Löw and embraced the winning coach. Schweinsteiger hugged Messi, trying to console him, but the greatest player of the modern era looked in a daze.
Schweinsteiger did well to be standing, having taken some fearful hits from the Argentines, from Javier Mascherano twice, from Lucas Biglia and Sergio Agüero.
He had a few words for Messi but the vanquished captain was hardly listening. Exuding all the enthusiasm of condemned men, Messi stood with his team-mates, and Sabella, waiting for the call to go and collect their ­losers’ medals. They hardly moved, as if almost turned to stone by the ­misery within. Agüero’s eyes moistened. Ezequiel Garay and Martin Demichelis, who had played so well until Götze called, looked on, heartbroken.
Messi first had to go and pick up the Golden Ball, a decision greeted with widespread surprise. Messi was not even Argentina’s best player at this tournament; the tireless warrior Mascherano was. How Messi was given the Golden Ball ahead of Thomas Müller, ahead of Schweinsteiger and ahead of James Rodríguez is one for Fifa’s technical study group to justify. We expect bizarre decisions from Sepp Blatter but not from respected coaches like Gérard Houllier and former internationals like Sunday Oliseh, Ioan Lupescu and Mixu Paatelainen. Very odd.
The Germans did not seem too bothered. As the Maracana speakers pumped out Happy, Götze was underneath a huge Teutonic pile-on. The Brazilian fans loved Argentina’s discomfort, taunting the Messi fan club with signals to the five stars on their chest and pretending to cry.
Schweinsteiger led the Germans up, shaking hands with Dilma Rousseff, who was roundly booed by many Brazilians present, and then embracing Angela Merkel. Dilma handed the trophy to Philipp Lahm, and stepped back, as the derision rained in. Lahm lifted the trophy to the skies, as the fireworks hurtled upwards.
It then got shared around. Sami Khedira, who unfortunately damaged his calf in the warm-up, kissed the trophy gently before hoisting it up. Gözte held it with his right hand, stared at it in wonderment, as it sank in that he had scored in a final, echoing the feats of the likes of Pele, Mario Kempes, Gerd Müller, Gerson, Jairzinho, Zinedine Zidane, Andrés Iniesta and Geoff Hurst. Götze then passed the World Cup to Schürrle, returning the compliment from the most decisive moment of the final.
Schweinsteiger, clutching the ­trophy, and Lahm led the squad’s run towards their fans. Manuel Neuer ­signalled they should get closer. Mesut Özil, stripped to the waist, climbed over the hoardings, and the players followed him and Neuer, forcing their way through the milling photographers and going to their supporters, sharing the moment with them. The fans held up stars denoting World Cups – 1954, 1974, 1990 and 2014. They had come well prepared.
Behind the dancing players, one figure in white could be seen. Müller was overwhelmed with emotion, perhaps even exhaustion. He briefly held back from the partying pack of his team-mates. He looked at the Maracana pitch, knowing he had run himself into the ground for his country.
Müller could reflect that Germany’s journey to glory in Brazil began in the heat of Salvador, his hat-trick helping thrash Portugal, then on to Fortaleza and that entertaining draw with Ghana before the group concluded with a hard-fought win over the United States in Recife, Müller again proving decisive. Algeria were overcome in extra-time, this time Özil scoring at the death. Mats Hummels proved too powerful for France in the quarter-final while German players were queuing up to score against Brazil, the four goals in six minutes arguably the most remarkable period in World Cup history. And then this.
It was a feast for the rich and powerful, for Vladimir Putin, Pele, Angela Merkel, Bebeto, Mick Jagger, Kaka, Shakira, Gisele Bündchen and Carles Puyol who carried the trophy out with all the tender care of a father cradling a newborn.
The fight to succeed Puyol’s Spain as world champions had started with Germany enjoying plenty of possession, 65 per cent before the interval, but Argentina were always a threat on the counter. Messi glided down the right, cutting into space vacated by Ezequiel Lavezzi, and running at Hummels, who had been lured wide. Messi flicked at the accelerator, taking him away from Hummels, reaching the bye-line and cutting the ball back. Schweinsteiger, a defensive as well as creative force this tournament, had dropped back and positioned himself well to clear.
Argentina attacked again, wasting a gift of a chance after 20 minutes. Toni Kroos decided to head the ball back to Neuer, not checking for blue shirts.
Higuaín took a touch, heading into inviting space with Neuer not in one of his sweeper moods. Higuaín glanced right, perhaps checking whether Messi was around. The Napoli centre-forward never looked convincing as he addressed the ball. He caught it with his shin, and dragged it wide. Awful.
Some of Argentina’s subs pulled their bibs over their heads, trying to block out the sight of such a horrible miss. Sabella turned away in frustration.
Christoph Kramer had never recovered from his collision with Garay and departed, looking shell-shocked, his eyes hollow. In the ensuing debriefings on events at this World Cup, Fifa’s medical department needs to examine whether officials are responding adequately enough to head injuries.
Kramer was replaced by Schürrle, an attacking move by Löw.
The Germans dominated possession but still could not find a way through Sabella’s well-organised defence. Even when Müller found some space, Schürrle’s shot was athletically saved by Romero. The first period was not a classic but it was compelling to watch, shifting from end to end, Argentina almost doing more with less. Messi showed again, darting away from Hummels, heading the ball on, beating the centre-half for pace, refusing to tumble when an outstretched arm came across him. Messi was too focused on cutting the ball back. As Lavezzi stretched to turn it in, Boateng recovered to clear.
Such moments brought explosions of sound from supporters. It was so intense. Müller and Rojo squared up. Germany came so close to scoring, Howedes escaping from Mascherano and heading Kroos’s corner against the post.
Sabella made his first move at the break, sending on Agüero for Lavezzi. Some space opened up for Messi and he took aim as thousands of his compatriots behind Neuer’s goal stood hopefully. But Messi was almost too casual and rolled his shot wide. After 56 minutes, Argentina were outraged by Neuer’s charge from his line, leaping to punch the ball above Higuaín but the momentum sending his knee into the striker’s head.
This was hardly a Harald Schumacher incident, but it still endangered a forward. Higuaín was even more stunned when a free-kick was awarded against him.
In extra time, Romero saved from Schürrle. Boateng continued to impress, dispossessing Agüero. Palacio missed a wonderful chance, lifting the ball over Neuer but wide. And then came Götze. What a finish.
• The 50 most memorable images of the 2014 World Cup • Final ranking of 1 to 32 of the teams on skill and entertainment • 'Germany eats Argentine steak' - world's papers on the final • Becks, Rihanna, Gisele - best pics of celebs at the Maracana • Germany's night of glory and Messi's misery - best images • Paul Hayward: Lionel Messi's Golden Ball was a bizarre award