In a match that has come to be defined by how much it is worth, every missed chance can cost you millions. In the £163m game, Hull City squandered opportunities like a dissolute playboy throwing away his cash in the casino at Monte Carlo.
Chance after chance came and went until it seemed that Steve Bruce’s side must surely have let the jackpot slip away in the Championship Play-Off, the richest game in football. And then, just when it seemed they must have blown the lot and that another season of penury in the second tier beckoned, they finally hit paydirt.
It was 18 minutes from the end when Mo Diame curled a quite brilliant winner over the heroic Keiren Westwood in the Sheffield Wednesday goal and the blue and white hordes, who had sung themselves hoarse and dominated Wembley with their noise and their numbers, finally fell silent.
That's it from Wembley Stadium, but the action doesn't stop here. Click on the above link to follow all the action from the Champions League final as Real Madrid take on city rivals Atletico in Milan.
That's all from me here, I'll leave you with some more Hull celebrations as they book their place back in the top flight. Cheerio.
Steve Bruce making a point of going round shaking the hands of every Wednesday player. Classy gesture.
20 - Hull have become the 20th team to gain promotion straight back to the Premier League having been relegated the year before. Bounce.
Hull City have won promotion to the Premier League
90+3min: A few seconds are eaten up by Jakupovic who needed treatment after a very minor clash. I suspect there may be some additional time on top of the four minutes.
It's probably not going to matter though. Wednesday could be playing until next Wednesday and they still wouldn't lay a glove on Hull. Verry disappointing performance from the Owls.
90+1min: We are into four added minutes as Sheffield Wednesday search for an equaliser. In truth they haven't even had a shot on goal since falling behind. Very disappointing from the Owls.
89min: And a final change for Hull as Diame is given a standing ovation by the Tigers fans, with his goal looking like its fired Steve Bruce's side back into the Premier League. Harry Maguire replaces him.
87min: Final change for Sheffield Wednesday who now have four strikers on the pitch as Lucas Joao replaces Daniel Pudil.
85min: Second change for Hull as David Meyler come on in place of Hernandez. For just about the first time today, the 26,000 Hull fans are making more noise than the 45,000 Sheffield Wednesday fans. No surprise given the state of play though.
82min: Now there is one unhappy Scot. Snodgrass is fuming as he is brought off by manager Steve Bruce, uttering frustrated looking verbals before throwing his bib on to the ground and taking his place in the stand. He has been replaced by Sam Clucas as Abel Hernandez sees a shot blocked wide.
81min: Must say I'm disappointed with Sheffield Wednesday here. Into the final ten minutes and there is little urgency in their play as Hull prepare a change.
78min: Not much response from the Owls players, in fact there hasn't been much change in the pattern of the play at all. I'd still back Hull to get the next goal as Odubajo lashes wide at the near post with a snapped half volley.
75min: Sam Hutchinson has had to limp off for Sheffield Wednesday and replacing him is Atdhe Nuhiu as the Owls go for broke - they really have no other choice.
Here is that stunning Diame strike that Westwood did get a slight hand to:
GOAL! Hull 1-0 Sheffield Wednesday (Diame) What a strike! More here: https://t.co/moclOV1q1i https://t.co/jLd3JHvuVt
72min: Forget Mo Diame and his passing, it's his shooting Sheffield Wednesday want to worry about!
Not even Westwood can stop this as the midfielder collects the ball 25 yards out before curling a stunning strike across goal and into the top corner.
70min: If there is a winner in regulation time, my money would be on Hull though. The legs are getting tired but Diame's passing has been catching the Owls defence short for much of the afternoon.
67min: ... that's of course making exception for Westwood who has been outstanding. But being in the Wednesday goal, he isn't going to help find any net busters unless he goes all 'Jose Luis Chilavert' on us.
66min: If anything that owls substitution has rather killed this game's flow. Not much threat from other side right now and for about the first time this afternoon, I'm starting to seriously consider the prospect of extra-time being needed. Desperate lack of quality out there right now.
63min: First change for Wednesday as Jeremy Helan replaces Ross Wallace - although ironically it comes at a time when they are getting back into the game.
60min: Even Wednesday are getting in on the act now as Sam Hutchinson blasts just over from the edge of the box following a fine run through the centre.
59min: What a chance for Hull! This time Westwood did look beaten but as Odubajo breaks down the right and feeds the ball into the box, Andrew Robertson turns a first time effort well off target with the goal gaping. A penny for Steve Bruce's thoughts - the amount of chances his side have had and wasted is getting ridiculous.
56min: Carlos Carvahal must be thinking of making a change for Sheffield Wednesday. Just like the first half it's Hull who are by far looking the more dangerous team. You sense Westwood's luck/skill/ability will fall short at one point.
53min: Surely Hull should take the lead now? No! It's Westwood to the rescue again!
This time the ball somehow squirms its way through to Dawson at the far post but his close range effort is once again beaten away by the Owls stopper who is having the game of his life - that's three quite brilliant stops now.
50min: Brilliant recovery from the Hull defence. From a long Keiren Westwood goal kick, Michael Dawson allows the ball to bounce and it gives Fernando Forestieri an invitation to run in on goal.
But before the Owls player can shoot, Curtis Davies cuts across to make a crucial tackle and block behind for a corner.
48min: Slow old start to the second half. No side really on top as both sides attempt to take control in the midfield.
Hull the better team in the first half but they'll be kicking themselves. Lots of chances and haven't been able to finish them
Sheffield Wednesday may be concerned there has been too much, with Westwood having had to make a number of fine stops to keep at Hull at bay.
The Tigers have also struck the post and had a penalty shout denied, with the Owls' major threat coming in the form of a couple of free-kicks punched clear by Jakupovic.
Either way, I'm looking forward to the second period. Will Hull regret missing all those opportunities?
3 - Three of the last four Championship play-off finals have been 0-0 at half-time. Patience.
45+2min: Last action of the first half sees a Wednesday corner result in a headed effort well stopped (and not punched) by Jakupovoic.
45min: We are into one added minute as Steve Bruce looks on wondering just how his Hull side are not winning this game.
43min: No doubt about it, Westwood is keeping Sheffield Wednesday level. Odubajo beats offside as Elmohamaday's clever through ball while looking the other way releases the full-back into the box, but the Owls stopper is once again off his line to block.
Jack Hunt was well behind his defensive line to keep the Hull full-back onside there.
'Hull well on top now! Westwood pulled off a stunning stop from Hernandez and Diame has struck a post. Carvalhal wants half-time.'
41min: Respite for the Owls as they win a free-kick out wide on the right, but a floated delivery towards the back post is cleared.
39min: Sheffield Wednesday are hanging on! Mo Diame beats three Owls players on the edge of the box, as he darts past the hesitating trio with fancy footwork before his near post shot clatters off the post and away to safety.
He really had no right to get in a shot but if I'm being harsh, once he did get past the defence he perhaps should have least hit the target. Easy to say from behind a keyboard though.
36min: Hull looking a little more dangerous now as Moses Odubajo fires wide of the near post from the edge of the box. the Tigers now enjoying their best spell of the game.
34min: What a save from Westwood! Diame's through ball catches the Owls back four flat and although Hernandez collects, his poked effort is diverted over by the advancing Sheffield Wednesday keeper. Not much else the Hull striker could have done from that position.
31min: Having looked at Lee's block to deny Dawson from a corner again, it appears the Owls star used his hand to prevent the defender from scoring.
He looks to have got away with that as Forestieri slices badly wide from 25 yards.
28min: Chance for Hull! A Robert Snodgrass corner is headed towards the bottom corner by Hernandez but Kieran Lee is on the post to block before Dawson is fumbled trying to turn home the rebound.
25min: Possession football from Sheffield Wednesday and it's not really going anywhere right now. Not much movement from the Owls forwards and it's leading to the back four playing the ball from side-to-side.
22min: Not quite as cagey, unless your Abel Hernandez. The Hull striker has been kept under lock and key by the Sheffield Wednesday defence so far.
Aside from that Huddlestone effort in the opening minutes, the Tigers really haven't tested Westwood.
'Wednesday dominant thus far - more zip about their game. Couple of early saves for stand-in Jakupovic to make. Not quite as cagey as we thought it might be.'
16min: Are there a few nerves in Jakupovic? The Hull keeper appears to be punching everything (and by everything I mean cross, shots etc rather than players) as a weak free-kick to his near post sees the Hull stopper use both fists to beat the ball away.
It does the job, but it doesn't seem the most convincing of starts for Jakupovic.
13min: Clumsy trip from Mo Diame on Sam Hutchinson gives Sheffield Wednesday a free-kick 25 yards out. Needless foul.
A lack of discipline from the Tigers early on.
10min: Despite the tight angle to goal, Forestieri shot towards the near post top corner from the free-kick, with Eldin Jakupovic punching over the crossbar. A very conservative save as Hull survive the resulting set-piece.
9min: Well that was never going to end well for Michael Dawson. The Hull defender is turned on a sixpence by Fernando Forestieri, and his only response is to desperately lunge with a sliding tackle near the byline to bring down the Owls star - picking up a yellow card in the process.
4 - The team finishing fourth in the Championship has been promoted just once in the last 17 seasons. Unfancied.
3min: Shots from both sides to open up th egame. Tom Huddlestone blocking from Ross Wallace before the former Tottenham midfielder's rising 20-yard drive is well stopped by Keiran Westwood.
From Sportsmail's Jack Gaughan at Wembley Stadium:
'Glenn Loovens was taking about goosebumps to me this week and he looked in awe making his way back into the dressing rooms after the warm ups.
'Wembley is electric. Hi Ho Sheffield Wednesday belted out with unbelievable gusto.'
There are many empty seats in the upper and middle tier at Wembley on Hull's side - hardly a speck of red to be seen in the Wednesday section.
Could you have imagined Sir Alex Ferguson calling his Manchester United captain Steve Brucio?
NICK GODDEN: Sheffield Wednesday face Hull City in the Championship play-off final at Wembley, bidding to return to the top flight of English football for the first time in 16 years.
The Yorkshire-based club were relegated from the Premier League at the end of the 1999-00 season following a 3-3 draw with Arsenal in their penultimate game of the season.
With the pressure off, Wednesday beat Leicester City – the new Premier League champions – 4-0 at Hillsborough on the final day of the season. Here is a reminder of the starting XI and what happened next in their careers.
Well it is if you are a Sheffield Wednesday fan. The Owls sold out their 40,000 allocation as well as the extra 5,000 they were given.
Hull meanwhile have sold only 26,000 tickets, meaning they may be a few gaps in the Tigers end.
It's worth noting it's not always a lack of interest that can lead to this. Sometimes ticket prices can turns supporters away - especially when some areas of the ground are charging nearly £100. No one should have to pay that to watch a game of football. Rip-off.
Michael Dawson leads @HullCity out for their biggest game of the season. The Tigers look ready! #PlayOffFinal pic.twitter.com/r8rHyyxEl7
Hull: Jakupovic, Odubajo, Dawson, Davies, Robertson, Elmohamady, Livermore, Huddlestone, Snodgrass, Diame, Hernandez.Subs: Bruce, Meyler, Clucas, Maguire, Maloney, Akpom, Kuciak.
Sheff Wed: Westwood, Hunt, Lees, Loovens, Pudil, Wallace, Lee, Hutchinson, Bannan, Forestieri, Hooper.Subs: Marco Matias, Nuhiu, Helan, Lucas Joao, Sasso, Wildsmith, Lopez.
Westwood, Hunt, Lees, Loovens, Pudil, Wallace, Hutchinson, Lee, Bannan, Forestieri, Joao.
TEAM NEWS: Here’s the @HullCity team to face @swfc in today’s @SkyBetChamp #PlayOffFinal #DareToDream #HULSHE pic.twitter.com/4hGIzAeOo1
But when Wembley is hosting a match worth £163million to the winner it's hard to ignore the Championship play-off final this afternoon as two Yorkshire rivals go head to head for a place in the Premier League.
Good afternoon all welcome to Sportsmail's live coverage of Sheffield Wednesday vs Hull City at Wembley.
Follow Sportsmail's coverage of the Championship play-off final as Sheffield Wednesday and Hull City clash at Wembley with a place in next season's Premier League up for grabs.
The Football League have confirmed that the match will be worth a minimum £163million to the winners, with Steve Bruce's Tigers hoping to return to the top flight at their first attempt since relegation last year.
But for the Owls it has been a much longer wait, as Carlos Carvalhal's team bid to end their 16-year exile from the Premier League.