87 mins Tyler Blackett sticks with jinking trickster Cristiano Ronaldo and does well to block his cross for a corner.
85 mins United are - barring meltdowns - in Monday's final now. Against Liverpool. In Miami. Miami Nice. Zaha nearly makes it four. He stretches for a deep, high cross and does well to volley but it flashes wide.
Manchester United 3 Real Madrid 1 (Hernandez 79). Great ball from Kagawa and Hernandez loses Pepe and applies a brave header past Casillas. He had missed two half-chances so that will be a confidence-booster.
76 mins Great ball from Lingard from the right and although Hernandez gets a touch, it's not quite strong enough.
75 mins My colleague Mark Ogden points out that Michael Keane sees his tormentor Gareth Bale switch to the right flank, only to see Cristiano Ronaldo replace him on the left! Struck between a rock and a hard place!
73 mins Ancelotti said this game was too early for Ronaldo, but he's putting his shinpads on... Arbeloa coming off. Can Ronaldo and Bale combine to scupper United's final bid? Crowd roar.
71 mins Isco booked for foul on Lingard. Strong surging run from Shaw. Finds Kagawa. Chip to Hernadez but low poke is saved by Casillas. Shaw again, sets up Cleverley, Casillas paws away. United could have clinched it there.
Kapalu Mutenda "So many people calling for new signings. Seems people forget part of the job of a trainer-coach (as LVG calls himself) is to improve the players he already has. I think more can be squeezed out of the likes of Young, Cleverley and Fletcher."
66 mins Real pressing hard, several corners. Then a great ball by the impressive Bale, but De Tomas heads over.
63 mins Hernandez on for Rooney. Kagawa and Lingard also on for Mata and Valencia. And it looks as if Ronaldo is coming on at some stage!
61 mins Modric reminds us he is playing. He's been quiet. Another player United have been linked with in the past, of course. Real have a corner - ball lands to Pepe, who shoots wide.
58 mins Liverpool v Manchester United then in Miami (probably). That's nice. They will meet in the league on Dec 13 (Old Trafford) and March 21 (Anfield).
55 mins Bale takes the free-kick and it hits the base of the post before being cleared. Raul de Tomas comes on as Alonso's replacement. He's a Spain Under-19 forward. Man City and Olympiakos drew 2-2, and the Greeks won the shoot-out 5-4. That means Liverpool are in the final.
54 mins Arbeloa fouled by Shaw, though it was soft. Alonso - another Spaniard who was at Liverpool - is injured and goes off.
50 mins Remember the only way Manchester United will not be in Monday's final - possibly against Liverpool or Manchester City - is if they lose in normal time.
47 mins Great run by Gareth Bale, beats Keane again. Finds Isco - he shoots, it is deflected, De Gea holds on, Isco should have scored.
Luke Shaw on for Ashley Young, Tyler Blackett on for Jonny Evans, Tom Cleverley on for Ander Herrera.
Phew! Received a lot of emails! Now need a quick break and second half follows!!
Kerry Brown "We need to further strengthen our team with experienced players such as Hummels and Vidal. Otherwise I feel we are spreading ourselves too thinly and could be up the creek when injuries set in. V impressed with LVG so far!"
Paul Miller "Great first half for United. Curious how some players shine in pre-season then fade in Premier League. Zaha. Young. Nani. So how much are we really learning? Clear that we need a centre half as an absolute minimum."
John Durham "Certainly dont need to overspend. LVG reminds me of a young Fergie when he took over and started working on the youth system. What's great to see are young BRITISH players being given the chance to shine. I think maybe one solid central defender and poss a good central midfielder (youthful). LVG's tactics thus far on the US tour have looked really promising."
Tyler Wood "Van Gaal doesn't 'need' to sign anyone for a top04 finish, but to be top-top, and be competitive in the CL, he has authority from the board to break the bank; set a record. Buy Ronaldo for bigger than Bale £110m should do it. Sell Van Persie. It's not unbelievable."
Jason A Greer "I'm enjoying your coverage of the game at the Big House. I'm curious though of your reference to fans having a BBQ in the gardens. As a us college football fan, I suspect you mean the fans are grilling at their tailgate. BBQ is generally a noun not a verb here, and no fan would refer to his tailgate spot as a garden. Thanks for the coverage, enjoying it in South Carolina."
Jonny Walker "I feel United need a big centre-half such as Hummels. Herrera should be joined in midfield by Marek Hamsik and Arturo Vidal. Front line is already strong but Marcus Reus would be good with Mata, RVP and Rooney. Need to sell Welbeck, Cleverley, Nani and Anderson."
Prasad Sheshadri "Sir Alex wanted a grand farewell and pumped the team with world-class attacking options. No replacement for scholes for couple of seasons meant, Utd didn't have a holding midfielder to dictate midfield, hence even outclassed by the minnows. I'd like to sign Vermalen or Hummels."
John Davids "The line-up tonight is fine for our standards - it's a similar squad to our last few games and those games went well for us. I i don't think we need any changes, maybe one new defender, but other than that our squad is fine as it is all we needed was a decent manager."
Adam Hughes "United do not need signings - our team is capable of winning the league and FA cup this season - mark my words, a load of youths going to break through this season and the big name to watch is Reece James."
Utsav Tyagi "There has to be more stability and dynamic in the midfield. Vidal is just perfect. LVG surely needs an experienced centre-back. They also need a player to play on either of the wings, like Marco Reus."
Aaron J "I think who leaves is a priority. Bebe has finally been ditched, now for Nani, Young and Fellaini!"
Half-time: Manchester United 2 Real Madrid 1 Great stuff by the Red Devils. Ashley Young scored after a sublime 20-pass move; Gareth Bale fouled by Michael Keane and he easiuly scores the penalty. The impressive Young helps United recapture the lead - he crosses and Wayne Roney claimed the goal with a header. I think it was Young's goal, though. He is answering his critics in that new left-wing-back role. United only need a point to make Monday's final but they look as if they are going to win against a depleted Real Madrid without Ronaldo, Benzema, James Rodriguez and others.
45 mins Evidence of some clever free-kick routines. This time Rooney clips it to the near post and Mata tries a first-time volley that goes wide.
42 mins Welbeck has gone off and Wilfried Zaha on. Hamstring for Welbeck maybe. I will catch up with your views at half-time. Getting a lot of emails! Quite a few lambasting Paul Atkinson for his slating of Ashley Young earlier! United finishing the half strongly.
Manchester United 2 Real Madrid 1 (Young 37). Initially called for Rooney. Young beats Aebeloa and then swings in a teasing cross. Rooney leaps but doesn't appear to touch it and the ball goes straight in. So Young really enjoying this new role and United back in front against the European champions.
35 mins Overhead kick from a transformed Gareth Bale. Bit like Pele in Escape to Victory. Except he doesn't score. De Gea saves but lovely technique from the Welshman.
30 mins Fizzing free-kick from Rooney from deep, Casillas worried briefly but then reads it well and lets it go out for a goal-kick.
29 mins Alvaro Arbeloa booked for checking Young's run. Free-kick...
Manchester United 1 Real Madrid 1 (Gareth Bale pen, 27 mins). The former Tottenham star equalises as a result of their first attack. Bale is so cool as he sweeps it into the right-hand corner, with De Gea diving the worng way. Lesson for young Keane there. Real will look for more joy down that left flank, you feel.
Penalty to Real Madrid. Michael Keane concedes it, grappling and then almost collapsing into Gareth Bale. Bale and Real suddenly alive.
Manchester United 1 Real Madrid 0 (Ashley Young, 21 mins) It's been coming! Great passing - Valencia finds Fletcher, he does a one-two with Rooney, who finds Welbeck, and he lays it off for Young... who speeds up from the left-wing-back slot to shoot emphatically into the corner of the net. 20 passes in that move (featuring every outfield player) as Real Madrid look a pale imitation of the great sides we are accustomed to.
19 mins Valencia runs at Nacho and possibilities open up. He fluffs his cross, though, which ends up looking like a backpass.
18 mins Rooney has more room for this free-kick, from the right. It swigs in, but Real clear.
13 mins Mata wins a corner. He's looking lively. Rooney has a short run-up thanks to the close promixity of the crowd. Ball runs out to Flecther who shoots wide.
Aaron J "Definitely need an experienced centre-back and centre-midfielder before the start of the season. Vermaelen, Hummels, Miranda for cb and Vidal, Carvalho or Bender for midfield. VG definitely needs to dip into the pool of young talent on offer too. Some quality players at youth level that need bleeding into the team soon."
Paul Atkinson "Awful line-up - could get a good pasting: I can't understand why Young is in a Man U shirt still! LVG needs a new defence for sure!"
10 mins Pepe nearly slips up fielding a long ball as United attack with intensity. First look at Bale - and he's offside.
9 mins It's all United at the moment. Welbeck tries to shunt through the Real defence but is he;ld up by two defenders. Then Carvajal wins another free-kick.
7 mins Mata attacking down the middle, feeds Valencia who is steaming down the right flank, cross comes in and Real clear, though not with complete composure. Rooney's corner floats over but then it's another free-kick.
5 mins Welbeck looking lively. Big season for him. Interesting to see how much he will feature upon Robin van Persie's return. Herrera's heavy touch sees the move break down, though.
3 mins Rooney tries to put through Welbeck through with a piercing pass, but Nacho comes over from the left to cover.
1 min Real Madrid - who only have pride to play for - are in white, United in red-black so traditional look for this enticing encounter.
21:07 Seven Nation Army by White Stripes now and then we are off...
Real Madrid: Casillas, Arbeloa, Nacho, Pepe, Ramos, Carvajal, Illarramendi, Alonso, Modric, Bale, Isco.  Manchester United: De Gea; M Keane, Jones, Evans; Valencia, Herrera, Fletcher, Young; Mata; Rooney, Welbeck.
21:03 Aaron Copland: Fanfare for the Common Man. Triffic tune. Three minutes till the start.
21:02 Ronaldo is on the bench. One of nine World Cup stars not starting. He fancies a run-out against his old side, apparently, though Carlo Amncelotti less keen because of his knee injury problems. No Karim Benzema among others.
21:01 Not long now. The Star-Spangled Banner being belted out just before the teams come out. The crowd in Ann Arbor (not Detroit, that is about 50-60 miles away) respond enthusiastically.
20.51 Inter Milan beat Roma 2-0 earlier today, so United need only a point to make Monday's final. If they lose in normal time they will not make thefinal, though.
20:43 Van Gaal may not be happy about the pitch, but he likes the barbecues in the Detroit area apparently. Lots of them in the gardens on the way to the stadium. Part of the American culture - bbq, then 'The Game' Or... 'The Ballgame' (TM). Hope the United coach had the windows up - don't want the players' stomachs rumbling during the match.
20:36 It's the first 'soccer' game at this venue. The grass - which was installed on Thursday - is thick and the surface doesn't look great, apparently; Louis van Gaal's misgivings appear to have had foundation.
20:33 A reminder: Louis van Gaal’s team will secure top spot, and a place in Monday’s final in Florida, if they avoid defeat against the European champions. Their final opponents could be Liverpool, or Manchester City.
Tolani Ojo-Bello "My signings would be: Arturo Vidal, Lars Bender or William Carvalho, Daley Blind or Ricardo Rodriguez, Mats Hummels or Thomas Vermaelen..."
20:26 So Ronaldo does miss out on the day he is hinted he may one day return to Old Trafford. But there is Gareth Bale, against the club he reportedly snubbed to go to the Bernabeu instead. And Modric, another who left Spurs for Spain. And Xabi Alonso, who has never been satisfactorily replaced at Liverpool.
20:22 Real Madrid's starting XI: Casillas, Arbeloa, Nacho, Pepe, Ramos, Carvajal, Illarramendi, Alonso, Modric, Bale, Isco.
And the United starting XI again: De Gea; M Keane, Jones, Evans; Valencia, Herrera, Fletcher, Young; Mata; Rooney, Welbeck.
20:07 A win tonight will confirm a place in the final of the Guinness International Champions Cup. And they could face Liverpool, in action at 11.30pm against AC Milan. United and Liverpool top Groups A and B respectively.
20:00 United's pre-season form pretty good so far - 7-0 over LA Galaxy, 3-2 against Roma (including a Rooney brace), and 5-3 on pens after a nil-niller against Inter. Van Gaal enjoying a honeymoon period. Real Madrid's summer results not as unconvincing (they drew with Inter and lost to Roma), but they do not give the impression that they are very worried about it. They will be up for this clash in the imposing stadium known as 'The Big House', in the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan, Detroit. The 109,000 crowd breaking the all-time US attendance record.
19:53 Van Gaal's tactics proved spot-on during the World Cup, and the 3-4-1-2 system seems to be his preferred one at Old Trafford.  Here is the starting XI: De Gea; M Keane, Jones, Evans; Valencia, Herrera, Fletcher, Young; Mata; Rooney, Welbeck. Chris Smalling is injured so will not even be on the bench. So England Under-21 star Michael Keane alongside Phil Jones and Johnny Evans in central defence; Antonio Valencia right-wing-back and Ashley Young on the left. Ander Herrera and Darren Fletcher, as expected, in the middle. Juan Mata in the hole, and Rooney just behind Danny Welbeck, I would have thought.
19:50 Van Gaal has made his mark already. He has spent thousands of pounds, apparently, on hi-tech tracking equipment to pinpoint what is lacking in the Manchester United players' games, after their woeful seventh-placed finish last term in the Premier League. Circular tables, rather than rectangular, are also on the menu in the canteen - it's good to talk, the Dutchman believes. And they need to speak English at all times to each other. Even swear words??
19:47 Cristiano Ronaldo is not expected to feature for the 10-time European champions tonight. But Gareth Bale should... Plus Luka Modric and Xabi Alonso, who English fans know so well. And a line-up of Galacticos, that should provide the sternest test yet for Van Gaal's men. The Dutchman says he is taking his time to assess the talent that has been bequeathed him by Sir Alex Ferguson and David Moyes. They have signed Luke Shaw and Ander Herrera, but I will be surprised if more names do not follow.
19:40 This has the makings of an enticing treat tonight, and a very good reason not to go out on a Saturday evening! Manchester United - new and improved perhaps under Louis van Gaal - against the mighty Real Madrid. In front of 109,000 fans in Detroit. What's not to like?
11.30 Real Madrid forward Cristiano Ronaldo has been ruled out of tonight's friendly in Michigan against his former club but the Portuguese international will not rule out a return to Old Trafford in the future.
“It was one of my favourite clubs, Manchester,” Ronaldo said. “Everyone knows that every time when I speak about Real Madrid I should speak about Manchester United, I loved it there.
“I love Manchester, and to be back, I never know, you never know. Football you never know. Of course, I’m happy at Real Madrid, it’s my home, it’s my club, but Manchester treated me unbelievable so we never know.”
Ronaldo will be an avid spectator instead as his two favourite teams go head-to-head in the International Champions Cup friendly tournament in front of a 109,000 sell-out Michigan Stadium.
Real lost their opening two Group A matches against Serie A sides Inter Milan and AS Roma respectively which means their tournament is effectively over, while a draw or victory for United would be good enough to book a place in the final in the early hours of Tuesday morning.
Wayne Rooney says United are desperate to reach the final in Florida. With Liverpool or City vying for top spot in the other ICC group, the home of the Miami Dolphins is set to stage a box office encounter between two of the Premier League’s biggest rivals and Rooney admits that prospect will motivate United to claim the result they require against Real.
“It would be fantastic to get to the final against one of our biggest rivals,” Rooney said. “But it’s important to beat Real and end the group as leaders.
Huw Turbervill will be here from 8pm to bring you build up and coverage of tonight's match.