*At the time of publishing, the price was $95.
If you don’t care about Blu-rays—and if you don’t think you ever will—you should get the Samsung SE-208GB. It was as fast as (or faster than) the other DVD drives we tested, plus its compact size, sleek design, low price, and included software make it the best option available.
If you need an external optical drive for both Blu-rays and DVDs, get the Pioneer BDR-XD05B. It’s the lightest and most compact Blu-ray drive we tested, it was the fastest at burning and ripping DVDs, and it comes with a USB 3.0 Y-cable, which is handy if your computer can’t power the drive from one port. The Pioneer is slower to rip Blu-rays than competing drives and a bit noisier, though.
*At the time of publishing, the price was $130.
If you’re willing to pay more for a speedy drive to burn and rip DVDs and Blu-rays, we recommend the desktop LG External Blu-ray DVD Drive BE14NU40. But it’s larger, louder, and more expensive than our other picks, and it requires a dedicated power cord. Most people don’t need this, but it’s the best option if you frequently copy discs and need the speed.
With the ubiquity of streaming services and cloud storage, many people no longer need to use optical storage discs, and most new laptops don’t even have optical drives. But plenty of people still need to use one occasionally, whether to copy the music from a CD to your computer, play a movie on DVD or Blu-ray, install software that can’t be downloaded from the Internet for whatever reason, or back up your personal media library to your computer or network drive. If you still need an optical drive, but only sometimes, you’re better off getting an external optical drive to pair with a thin, light laptop rather than a chunky laptop with a built-in drive.
Over years of testing, we’ve found that external optical drives have few big differences between them—they tend to look alike and perform similarly. If you already have an optical drive that serves you well and works with the discs you have, you won’t gain much, if anything, from upgrading to one of our picks.
You also shouldn’t buy a portable drive for a desktop computer that has room for an internal drive, because drives with a dedicated power source tend to be faster and cheaper than portable USB-powered options. Nor should you buy an external drive to use with a tablet. (You could use an optical drive with an Android tablet, but doing so is far more trouble than it’s worth. And some Windows tablets can’t power an optical drive from their USB ports, though you can get around that by using a powered USB hub.)
The most important features for an optical drive—based on what we’ve learned from three years of research and testing and from surveying over 300 readers—are speed, size, weight (for portability), and noise, followed by included software. DVD drives must read and write DVDs, and Blu-ray drives must read and write both Blu-rays and DVDs. (We’ve found a few optical drives that will read, but not write, Blu-rays.)
The speed of an external drive has two components: the drive’s read and write speeds, and the speed at which data travels between the drive and the computer. Theoretically, a 6x Blu-ray drive should need only a USB 2.0 connection, since the drive writes at a maximum of 27 megabytes per second, and USB 2.0 will reach about 35 MB/s. In practice, however, the USB 3.0 drives we tested were a bit faster than the USB 2.0 models.
Seventy-four percent of our survey respondents use their external optical drive only at home, but enough people travel with one that both size and weight are important considerations. Plus, a more compact drive is easier to store when you’re not using it. And though all optical drives make noise, the drive shouldn’t drown out the movie or show you’re trying to watch.
Our survey also found an even split between people who need their drive to include software to play Blu-rays and DVDs and those who already have software or prefer free (but potentially illegal) alternatives. (To learn more about these free alternatives and what makes them illegal, take a look at our Playing DVDs and Blu-rays section below.) Many external drives come with software like CyberLink Media Suite for Windows.
Most recent computers provide enough power to run an optical drive off a single USB cable, but some older laptops (like the 2010 MacBook Air) don’t provide enough juice to a single port. For these computers, you’ll need a Y-cable that plugs into two USB ports to power the drive. Because they’re inexpensive on Amazon and few computers these days require a Y-cable, the inclusion of one isn’t a requirement, but it is a perk.
Few external disc drives are pretty, but the case shouldn’t fall apart under light pressure, the connections shouldn’t be wobbly, and the buttons need to work when pressed. Also, the optical drive shouldn’t get too hot while burning or ripping discs, and it should come with at least a one-year limited warranty to cover manufacturer defects.
With these criteria in mind, we scoured retailers for best-selling and top-rated optical drives, and we checked manufacturer websites for models released since our previous update in January 2015.
All the optical drives we tested for this update. (Not pictured: the LG BE16NU50, which looks identical to the LG BE14NU40 in the upper right corner.)
Our previous DVD drive pick, the Samsung SE218-CB, is no longer available, so we tested three new contenders, the Samsung SE-218GP, the Samsung SE-208GB, and the LG GP65NB60. We also tested four new Blu-ray drives—the LG WP50NB40, the Pioneer BDR-XD05B, the LG BE14NU40, and the LG BE16NU50—against our previous pick, the Samsung SE-506CB.
We tested each DVD drive by ripping and burning The Fifth Element using ImgBurn and a Verbatim dual-layer DVD and timing how long each process took. (Ripping means writing a copy of the video on the disc to your computer; burning, in this context, is writing a playable video to the disc from your computer.) We also ripped a copy of The Fifth Element using MakeMKV, software that converts the disc into an MKV file, which you can then watch using free software such as VLC media player. For the Blu-ray drives, we repeated the above process and used both ImgBurn and MakeMKV to rip and burn Pacific Rim to a Verbatim dual-layer Blu-ray disc.
If you only need an external drive for DVDs, you should get the Samsung SE-208GB.
If you don’t need a drive that can read and write Blu-rays, you should get the Samsung SE-208GB. It’s inexpensive, thin, light, and fast, and overall the best external DVD drive we tested. But if you think you’ll need a Blu-ray drive at some point, it’s better to spend the extra money now instead of having to purchase a second optical drive in the future.
The SE-208GB took about 16 minutes to rip a DVD in ImgBurn, just under 21 minutes to burn a DVD using the same software, and 15.5 minutes to rip a DVD using MakeMKV. That’s just as fast as the Samsung SE-218GP (we suspect they contain the same drive) and both drives were roughly twice as fast as the LG GP65NB60 DVD drive at ripping DVDs in ImgBurn and MakeMKV.
The Samsung SE-208GB was speedy in all of our tests.
The Samsung SE-208GB’s eject button and indicator light are easy to find and press.
The Samsung SE-208GB weighs about half a pound with the included USB cable, making it the second-lightest drive we tested. (The LG DVD drive is 0.8 ounces lighter, but also much slower.) It measures 5.9 by 5.7 by 0.6 inches—not quite as thin and light as our portable Blu-ray pick, but one of the thinner and more-compact portable drives we tested. It also doesn’t come with a USB Y-cable. The included 2-foot USB cable will work for most people, but if you need an inexpensive Y-cable, this one should do the trick.
The drive’s activity-indicator light and eject button are located on the top rear of the drive, rather than the front of the tray. It’s a small touch, but we found this placement much easier to see and press during our testing (though it makes it difficult to use if the drive is in a narrow shelf). The SE-208GB DVD drive makes some noise when in use, but it isn’t loud enough to make it difficult to hear the movie you’re watching.
The top of the drive is covered in glossy black plastic, which picks up fingerprints and dust. It also scratches very easily; we set ours on a desk, occasionally stacking some of the other drives we were testing on top of it, and the Samsung ended up covered in fine, hairline scratches.
Because the SE-208GB doesn’t play or burn Blu-ray discs, it comes with a more limited version of the CyberLink software for Windows than our Blu-ray drive pick does. The drive is covered by a one-year warranty.
The Pioneer XD05B is the most compact and one of the fastest portable optical drives we tested, but it can get loud.
*At the time of publishing, the price was $95.
If you need an external optical drive for both Blu-rays and DVDs, we recommend the Pioneer BDR-XD05B. It’s the lightest and most compact of the Blu-ray drives we tested, it was the fastest at burning and ripping DVDs, and it includes a USB 3.0 Y-cable. It’s slower to rip Blu-rays and a bit noisier than competing drives, but the Pioneer isn’t loud enough to drown out a movie. (If you need a fast drive for ripping lots of Blu-rays and don’t care how large it is, skip ahead to our desktop external optical drive pick.)
The Pioneer is slower at ripping and burning Blu-rays, but it’s one of the fastest at DVDs.
In this test, the Pioneer is also the slowest at Blu-rays, but the speediest at DVDs.
The Pioneer was the fastest optical drive we tested at ripping DVDs in ImgBurn and MakeMKV, at 15 minutes, 44 seconds and 15 minutes, 13 seconds, respectively. It even slightly edged out the DVD-only drives and the bulkier desktop drives.
But the Pioneer was slower in both programs than the portable and desktop LG drives we tested at ripping a Blu-ray, with times of 53 minutes in ImgBurn and 1 hour, 39 minutes in MakeMKV. The portable LG drive took just 37 minutes, and 44 minutes, respectively, to complete the same tasks. (But that drive took twice as long to rip DVDs, is larger, and has a difficult-to-press eject button.) The Pioneer was faster than our previous pick (the Samsung SE-506CB) in every task except ripping a Blu-ray with MakeMKV.
The Pioneer BDR-XD05B has a USB 3.0 connection, unlike the many models that use USB 2.0.
The Pioneer BDR-XD05B is the smallest (5.2 inches wide and deep), thinnest (0.6 inches thick), and lightest (9.2 ounces, including the cord) of the Blu-ray drives we tested. Its black plastic case is matte, unlike the case of our DVD pick, so it’s less prone to showing fingerprints and dust or accumulating tiny scratches.
The Pioneer can get pretty noisy when ripping and burning discs, but it’s a little quieter when playing a movie straight from the disc. The whine of the drive was audible (but not overwhelming) during playback of quieter dialogue scenes, and I couldn’t hear it at all over Pacific Rim’s Jaeger-on-Kaiju action.
Not everyone prefers clamshell drives, but we like the convenient placement of the eject button.
The drive has a clamshell lid rather than a tray-loading design—when you press the Open button located on the top of the drive (rather than the front), the top opens like a car hood to let you insert or remove a disc. The BDR-XD05B comes with the CyberLink Media Suite for Windows and a one-year warranty.
The LG BE14NU40 is the best option if you burn and rip a lot of DVDs and Blu-rays.
*At the time of publishing, the price was $130.
If you need a superfast drive for burning and ripping DVDs and Blu-rays, and you don’t care how large or noisy it is, we recommend the LG External Blu-ray DVD Drive BE14NU40. This bulky desktop drive was the fastest we tested at burning and ripping Blu-rays, but it is also pricier and louder. Plus, it requires a dedicated power cord, weighs more than 3 pounds, and takes up a lot more desk space.
Out of the five Blu-ray drives we tested for this update, the LG BE14NU40 was the fastest at burning and ripping Blu-rays. In ImgBurn, the drive took just 29 minutes to rip a Blu-ray movie, and 23 minutes to burn it to a blank disc. We experienced a few errors when trying to burn the movie, but you can prevent this by reducing the write speed.1 The BE14NU40’s DVD ripping speeds were about equal to those of the Samsung SE-208GB and Pioneer BDR-XD05B, but the desktop drive was about 6 minutes faster at burning a DVD.
The LG is also the noisiest drive we tested, because it’s working at faster speeds than the others. This isn’t a dealbreaker as this drive is for people who will frequently burn and rip discs, not people watching movies straight from the drive.
The LG BE14NU40 (bottom) compared with the Pioneer BDR-XD05B (top). The LG is gigantic.
The BE14NU40 is massive, measuring 6.4 inches wide, 10.2 inches deep, and 2 inches thick and weighing a whopping 3.3 pounds. This tray-loading drive takes up considerably more room on a desk and is much harder to store in a drawer than the portable options we recommend for most people. It comes with a USB 3.0 cable, a power brick, the same CyberLink Media Suite as the Pioneer Blu-ray drive, and a one-year warranty.
Microsoft doesn’t include native support for DVD or Blu-ray playback in Windows 8 or 10, likely because the required codecs are expensive and that cost would be passed on to everyone who buys the operating system. The DVD Player software included with macOS allows Mac users to play DVDs, but the operating system has never supported Blu-ray playback. Windows 7 and earlier can play DVDs just fine without additional software, but not Blu-ray discs.
In order to play Blu-ray discs legally on a Mac or a Windows PC, you’ll need to purchase software that licenses those codecs. The people who make Blu-ray movies would prefer that you watch them on your television, so nobody has an incentive to make Blu-ray playback software that isn’t a dumpster fire, which could explain why nobody does. The CyberLink software included with our favorite Blu-ray drives is a decent option—more of a small trash-can fire—for Windows users, and similar alternatives exist for those running macOS/OS X.
You can find many free programs that bypass the DRM on DVD and Blu-ray discs—encryption designed to prevent you from copying the content from the discs, or even playing them on certain screens—such as MakeMKV or VLC media player combined with extensions, but all of these options, whether free or paid, fall into a legal gray area in the US. Whitson Gordon of Lifehacker explained that the moment you bypass the DRM of a disc—even if you’re only making a personal backup of media that you purchased or watching a Blu-ray without licensing the codec—you could find yourself in violation of the DMCA. Macworld also addresses some common questions about the legality (and morality) of DVD ripping in this helpful explainer.
In October 2015, the Library of Congress issued several exemptions to the DMCA related to DVD and Blu-ray footage, but these exemptions apply only to “documentary filmmakers, ‘noncommercial’ videos, multimedia e-books containing film analysis, college professors and students with educational purposes, and kindergarten through twelfth grade teachers with educational purposes,” and only if their usage meets certain conditions. Copyright laws could possibly change in the future, like the RIAA’s position on ripping music CDs, but until then, we recommend treading with caution when using software that bypasses the copy-protection on DVDs and Blu-rays.
We eliminated any DVD drives that cost more than $30 and any Blu-ray drives that cost more than $120, any that didn’t read and write discs, and any that had poor or few reviews on Amazon. We also eliminated older models of currently available drives, and we didn’t retest anything we’ve ruled out since we first published this guide in June 2013.
The Samsung SE-218GP had speeds nearly identical to those of the SE-208GB in our tests, and we suspect both contain the same drive. But the SE-218GP is a bit thicker, heavier, and more expensive, and comes with less bundled software than our DVD pick.
The Samsung SE-218CB External DVD Writer was our previous DVD pick, but has since been replaced with newer, thinner, and lighter models.
The LG GP65NB60 took about twice as long to rip DVDs as the Samsung DVD drives, plus it’s more expensive than the Samsung SE-208GB we recommend.
The Samsung SE-506CB Slim Blu-ray Writer was our previous pick for best external Blu-ray drive because it was the quietest, least expensive drive we tested in 2015. But it was a bit slower than the other options, and it doesn’t come with a Y-cable. Since the previous update to this guide in January 2015, we’ve seen reports where the drive has stopped reading Blu-rays after a few months of disuse. We experienced the same behavior on our test unit; we can no longer recommend the drive because of this issue combined with reports of poor customer service.
The Pioneer BDR-XD05 was our previous upgrade pick, but it has since risen in price and been replaced by the Pioneer BDR-XD05B.
The LG WP50NB40 was faster than the Pioneer BDR-XD05B at ripping Blu-rays, but took twice as long to rip DVDs. This LG Blu-ray drive is also larger, and its eject button—located on the side of the tray—is difficult to press.
The Samsung SE-506BB was our 2013 pick for Blu-ray drive, but its price later jumped about $20, so we no longer recommend it.
The Buffalo MediaStation Portable BDXL was another former pick for best Blu-ray drive because it used to be fastest drive for less than $100. But we received many user reports of compatibility issues with Macs and different versions of OS X and the price jumped about $30, so we no longer recommend it. Even if the price goes back down, we’re uneasy recommending the Buffalo due to the number of user complaints.
The Archgon MD-3107S is large, heavy, and expensive, and it doesn’t come with Windows software. We also encountered several errors when trying to play DVDs that worked without issue on the other drives.
The LG BE16NU50 is a newer version of our desktop pick, the LG BE14NU40. At the time of publication in June 2016, it’s difficult to find and more expensive than its predecessor. It was also about 4 minutes slower at ripping DVDs than the BE14NU40 in our tests.
We tested and eliminated the LG CP40NG10 Blu-ray player in 2014 because it doesn’t write Blu-rays.
The LG GP60NB50 has been replaced by the newer, smaller, and lighter LG GP65NB60 that we tested. LG confirmed that both models contain the same drive—the only difference is in their design. The LG GP50NB40 is an even older model in the same line.
The LG WP40NB30 has been replaced with the WP50NB40 that we tested. The LG BP40NS20 has also been replaced by newer models, and the LG SP80NB60 is too expensive.
The Pioneer BDR-XU03 has positive customer ratings and is thin and light, but is too expensive.
The Pawtec slot-loading Blu-ray writer has a 3.4-star (out of five) Amazon rating and is too expensive.
Pawtec’s drives (black, orange, and red) have poor ratings, and the (currently) $90 red model does not write Blu-rays.
The Archgon slot-loading Blu-ray player is bulkier and heavier than our picks.
1. A number of factors can cause write errors: the drive getting bumped, the disc being dirty, or the drive writing very fast and making a mistake. Burning at full speed usually works fine, but sometimes errors happen. If you want to be extra careful (to avoid wasting expensive Blu-ray discs) you can reduce the drive’s write speed in your software of choice. Jump back.