Russia has so many stadium options this 33,000-seat Colliseum style stadium in Krasnodar isn’t even hosting games.
RUSSIA gets its chance to host football’s World Cup in 20 months’ time and, although there will undoubtedly be the odd controversy in the lead-up, it appears the host country is doing everything it can to ensure its stadiums live up to expectation.
You’d think the European nation may have learnt its lesson after losing squillions of dollars through the 2014 Winter Olympics, but bucketloads of cash are being poured into venues in 11 host cities.
Of the 12 venues that will see World Cup action in 2018, seven will be newly built, two significantly refurbished and the other three all opened within the past three years.
It should all add up to a unique viewing experience for those in attendance and watching on television around the world.
This is where the Socceroos (with any luck) and the other 31 competing countries will battle for the most sought after trophy in sport.
The Grand Sports Arena "Luzhniki" in MoscowSource:istock
Luzhniki Stadium will host the final of the tournament, adding another chapter to its history which also included the 1980 Olympics and Manchester United’s dramatic UEFA Champions League final victory against Chelsea.
Work to rebuild the venue for the World Cup began in 2013 and while its historical facade will be maintained, the inside will be totally refurbished.
Inside Krestovsky Stadium in Saint Petersburg.Source:Getty Images
Designed by renowned Japanese architect Kisho Kurosawa, this modern structure will be equipped with a retractable roof and sliding pitch. The seven-storey exterior is envisioned to represent a spaceship that has landed on Krestovsky Island in the Gulf of Finland. It will become the home of European powerhouse Zenit St Petersburg and maintain a temperature of 15C inside the stadium — even in the Russian winter.
Central Stadium in Yekaterinburg is under full-scale renovation.Source:Getty Images
Laying further east than any other host city, Yekaterinburg’s famous stadium has been refurbished many times since it was built in 1953. A roof and temporary stands will be constructed for the World Cup.
Cosmos Arena will pay tribute to Samara’s proud aerospace history.Source:Alamy
Cosmos Arena is one of two stadiums (along with Kaliningrad) to be affected by delays and construction issues. But the Samara regional government insists it will be ready in time for the tournament. It’s design is dominated by the theme of space as a tribute to the region’s renowned aerospace sector.
A photograph showing the construction of Kaliningrad Stadium in September..Source:Getty Images
Built on an island in a port city located between Poland and Lithuania on the Baltic Sea, this stadium will be the jewel in a new residential development which will cover an area which was largely untouched wilderness for many centuries.
Otkrytiye Arena is home to Spartak Moscow.Source:Getty Images
Built by football power Spartak Moscow, this arena’s trademark is its diamond facade which can change from the red and white colours of its home club to the Russian flag when the national team plays. A new residential development is planned for its surrounds after the tournament.
Mordovia Arena has been designed in the shape of an oval.Source:Getty Images
Saransk is the smallest of Russia’s host cities and as such this stadium will be scaled back to around 25,000 seats after the tournament. It’s orange, red and white colours honour the palette of Mordovia’s arts and crafts.
A view of Rostov Arena’s construction last month.Source:Getty Images
Rostov Arena is being constructed on the south side of the Don River as Rostov-on-Don looks to expand its largely north-based population.
Nizhny Novgorod Stadium is being built where the Volga and Oka rivers join.Source:Getty Images
Located in one of Russia’s most historic and picturesque cities near the Alexander Nevsky Cathedral, this stadium is inspired by the elements of nature in the region and has a light, basic structure.
Kazan Arena was built in time to host the Summer World University Games and was designed by the same firm responsible for Wembley and Emirates Stadiums in London. Viewed from above it resembles a waterlily — fitting given it played host to the 2015 world swimming championships. It’s located on the western edge of Volga River.
Volgograd Arena is building on the site of the old Central Stadium.Source:Getty Images
Built near the memorial which commemorates the famous World War II battle of Stalingrad between Nazi Germany and the Russians, the new Volgograd Arena will be the new home for former Russian heavyweight FC Rotor.
The silhouette of the stadium represents the snow-capped mountain peaks of the Sochi region.Source:Getty Images
Built to host the opening and closing ceremonies of the 2014 Winter Olympics, the stadium is located on the Black Sea near the Sochi Formula One circuit.