Football Today: Gossip, news and more - Leeds United still tracking Fletcher Hull defender tops Premier League list Cellino departure talk Is Massimo Cellino's time at Leeds United coming to an end? If you believe everything you read in the Italian press, it could well be... 09/11/2016 - Yorkshire Post
Leeds United interested in controversial midfielder Leeds United interested in controversial midfielder Football League World Leeds United are the latest club to be linked with a move for controversial midfielder Joey Barton, according to The Herald Scotland... 09/11/2016 - Football League World
Chris Goreham: Leeds United winner summed up where Norwich City are right now One kick of the ball from at least 30 yards out travelled past all 11 City players before nestling in the corner of Michael McGovern's net... 09/11/2016 - Eastern Daily Press
Is Massimo Cellino close to selling Leeds United? Italian media believe so The Italian media has fuelled speculation that Leeds United owner Massimo Cellino remains keen to sell Leeds United and could be set to invest at another club... 09/11/2016 - Yorkshire Post
Rumours: Massimo Cellino close to selling Leeds United after Brescia talks The Italian media has fuelled speculation that Leeds United owner Massimo Cellino remains keen to sell Leeds United and could be set to invest at another club... 09/11/2016 - Yorkshire Evening Post
Leeds United: Youngster Vieira is revelling in emergence at Whites He has got a famous football name, but Whites' teenage midfielder Ronaldo Vieira, whose brother Romario is also on United's books, is determined to carve his own successful niche... 09/11/2016 - Yorkshire Evening Post
These 2 Leeds United stars really ought to be playing in the Premier League Under Garry Monk, this Leeds United side has been going from strength to strength in the Championship this season... 08/11/2016 - Football League World
Creepy Cawley is back On the night Cawley managed to get back into the stand, but the next day he was named and shamed on social media... 08/11/2016 - To Ell and Back
Football Today: Gossip, news and more - Hull City injury blows Hernandez impressing for Leeds United Middlesbrough wanted Valdes before Manchester Uni Hull City fans may be bouncing after Sunday's huge win but they have been brought back down to earth with a bang with a double injury blow to Will Keane and Abel Hernandez... 08/11/2016 - Yorkshire Post
Leeds United probe as banned fan Aaron Cawley is pictured at Norwich game Leeds United has launched an investigation into how hooligan football fan Aaron Cawley was able to get a ticket for the club's away match against Norwich City despite being handed a life ban four years ago for... 08/11/2016 - Yorkshire Post
Funeral of Leeds United legend Gary Sprake set to take place Funeral of Leeds United legend Gary Sprake set to take place ITV News The funeral of legendary Leeds United goalkeeper Gary Sprake will take place in the Midlands today... 08/11/2016 - Itv
Garry Monk will guide Leeds United to the top-flight this season, here's 3 reasons why.. Football League World Leeds United are flying high in the Championship right now, and it's safe to say Garry Monk has done a top job transforming the fortunes of a team who had struggled early on... 08/11/2016 - Football League World
Britain's most notorious football hooligan pictured hugging Leeds United goalscorer at game despite lifetime ban Aaron Cawley, 25, managed to get into the away end for his club's game against Norwich after blundering cops lifted his banning order... 08/11/2016 - Mirror
Leeds United: Injured Whites ace Dallas pulls out of Northern Ireland squad Leeds United midfielder Stuart Dallas has withdrawn from the Northern Ireland squad for Friday's World Cup qualifier against Azerbaijan... 07/11/2016 - Yorkshire Post
Leeds United face fight with Premier League side for 25-year-old Leeds United face fight with Premier League side for 25-year-old Football League World Sky Bet Championship side Leeds United are set to face competition from Premier League side Watford for Swedish international... 07/11/2016 - Football League World
Leeds United: Jansson targets promotion push PONTUS Jansson has thrown his full weight behind Leeds United's promotion drive, declaring: "we are a team for the play-offs and a team for going up to the Premier."... 07/11/2016 - Yorkshire Evening Post
Jansson wants to stay at Leeds despite Watford interest Leeds are said to be in talks with Torino about a permanent transfer, though Watford are hoping to snatch our new cult hero... 07/11/2016 - To Ell and Back
The Reason I Love Football so Much After reading it, I asked James if we could share his Leeds United love story here on Through It All Together as well... 07/11/2016 - Through it all Together
Team of the Week: Who makes the YP’s latest starting XI? A CASE of the haves and the have nots in this week's YP Team of the Week which is dominated by four clubs - Hull City, Leeds United, Middlesbrough and Sheffield United... 07/11/2016 - Yorkshire Post
Leeds United favourite Pontus Jansson targets starring role with Sweden LEEDS UNITED'S man of the moment Pontus Jansson has set his sights on excelling for Sweden, declaring: "Now is also my chance with the national team."... 07/11/2016 - Yorkshire Evening Post
POLL: Which summer arrival has had the biggest impact at Leeds United? IT was a busy summer of transfer activity at Elland Road under Garry Monk, with plenty of new faces coming in for Leeds United... 07/11/2016 - Yorkshire Evening Post
WATCH: See how Leeds United moved into the Championship play-off places after beating Norwich City LEEDS UNITED manager Garry Monk thought his side fully deserved their 3-2 win against Norwich City on Saturday... 07/11/2016 - Yorkshire Evening Post
Opinion: Chris Wood holds the key to Leeds United's success ... Football League World Leeds boss Garry Monk seems to be getting the best out of Chris Wood of late, with him regularly getting on the score-sheet and delivering some great... 07/11/2016 - Football League World
Pontus Jansson: ‘I am here to take Leeds United to the Premier League PONTUS JANSSON scored his first goal for Leeds United and pleaded for chairman Massimo Cellino to sign him on a permanent deal to help the Whites gain promotion to the Premier... 07/11/2016 - Yorkshire Post