Ben Raspison v Megan O'Brien, Gary Behan v Phil Lochhead, Clifford Peach v Humphrey Andolo, Andrew Wright v Tony Tatam, Warren Parkinson v Nick Buckland, John Dean v Paul Green, John Stephens v Bye, Geoff Banks, Brian Medhurst, John James v Bye, Derek Scantlebury v Richard Pollock, Rob Wilby v Adam Hart-Davis, Martin Quinn v Nick Hodge, Ben Wilkinson v Mick Stinton-Brownbridge, Jim Parsons, Ken Hunter, Michael Ghillyer v Alan Crickmore, Plamen Sivrev v Neil Crickmore
Johns Stephens wins the Strong KO Final to complete the double having already won the Club Championship
Club Champion Plamen Sivrev takes on 14 in the Annual Simultaneous, losing just two games, to Derek Scantlebury and Nick Butland. Plamen recorded 5 wins, 7 draws and lost 2.
Ron Bruce league  Champion - Plamen Sivrev (Runner-up - Adam Hart-Davis)
John Stephens wins the Annual Rapidplay - click on Rapidplay above for full results
Gary Behan did not turn up for the Challenge Final replay and subsequent enquiries established he is in hospital. Tony will arrange to play Gary at a later date. We wish Gary a speedy recovery.
The final game to be played in the Bloodworth league will decide the Champion. If Nick Hodge either wins or draws with the black pieces against Megan O'Brien then he will be outright Champion. However, if Megan wins then she will draw level with Nick on games points but will become Champion on the Sonneborn-Berger tie break rule. Nick has won 11 and drawn 4 and remains unbeaten. Megan has already lost to Nick in their first encounter so everything to play for here as Megan must go for the win. Both players will be promoted to the Ron Bruce league.
Phil Lochhead and Gary Behan will be promoted from the Ward league to the Bloodworth league as Champion and Runner-up respectively.
Clifford Peach & Ben Wilkinson made history tonight as they played their Homan league game to decide who finished the season as Runner-up to Phil Mcconnell. The Homan league is one of the internal competitions at the South Hams Club. As both players live locally to Plymouth they decided to play here. Ben won with the black pieces.
ECF Membership subsriptions will increase next season to:
To view the results/crosstable, click on the following link:
Annual Subscription.  The annual subscription is £25 for full Members. Unemployed & Students £12.50p.
Newcomers are welcome to attend a few sessions without charge, until they have made up their minds whether they wish to join. Just come along to the Club on Mondays or Wednesday but not on Bank Holidays.
The Club runs a number of internal Club competitions to suit different levels of players strength and also participates in the Torbay Chess League.
Club Champion, Plamen Sivrev, won 8, drew 3, and lost just 2 in the Annual Simltaneous display held on the 16th September. Young Nicholas Hodge turned in a fine performance when winning his game. Paul Green was the only other winner and there were draws from Megan O'Brien, Tony Tatam and Phil Lochhead.
Rob Wilby produced the shock of the season as he defeated Club Champion and Strong KO Cup holder Plamen Sivrev in just 16 moves. Rob now meets either Derek Scantlebury or Michael Discombe in Round 2.