Jimmy Connors: "Djokovic showed me guts and character, I thought he would have a dip after the fourth set but he didn't. And Roger, you cannot ask for more of the guy.
Jimmy Connors on the supercoaches: "Both coaches did well, Edberg had Roger chipping and charging, coming in on the second serve and volleying, even on match point. And Boris also, the work he had done with Novak on big points. Both coaches were excellent."
Here's Novak falling to his knees at the moment of triumph and, erm, enjoying a delicious piece of centre court turf.
Let's get a few of your emails, sorry didn't get around to all of them ealier. Stephen Nelson:
Now that Roger is an older player, a good few "pundits" have questioned Roger's fitness in the run-up to this final. I remember an interview with Rafa not long ago when he said something like, "I never underestimate Roger's fitness and stamina, sometimes it seems like he's not human when you play him".
Novak Djokovic, likewise: "Roger is a magnificent athlete, a great champion and a role model. I respect everything he has done in his career. In important moments he comes up with his best shots. It wasn't easy to regroup and compose myself after losing the fourth set. This is the tournament I always dreamed of winning. The first tournament I saw when I was five years old and it stayed in my mind.
"I would like to dedicate this trophy to my future wife and my future baby. I would also like to dedicate it to Jelena Gencic who was my first coach and taught me everything, she passed away last year and this is for her."
Roger Federer, absolute class act: "I can't believe I made it to five, it wasn't looking good there for a while. I can only say congratulations [to Novak], an amazing match and well deserved. I felt the love here, I enjoyed myself a lot, and see you next year."
NOVAK DJOKOVIC BEATS ROGER FEDERER BY THREE SETS TO TWO What a match. In the first half of the match, the tennis was of astonishing quality. As it got to the nitty-gritty, it became a truly fascinating pscyhodrama as first Roger, and then Novak, seemed ground down by the huge exertion and pressure of it all. When Novak had his chance in the fourth set, and blew it, it seemed as if Roger was the stronger. But Nole came back like a champion, a warrior.
DJOKOVIC 6 FEDERER* 4 (final set of five) Roger serving to stay in the match. He's hit a backhand into the net from a strong position. Djokovic has found a little something extra here, charging around the baseline like a mad thing. Roger fluffs a shot and it is 0-30. Novak has hit a forehand wide when under (relatively, although it seems absurd to say) pressure. Both players tightening up now. Roger hits one long and it is 15-40! Second serve. Rally. Oh, man. Roger has hit it into the net. No, Roger! But, yay, Novak! Novak Djokovic is the Wimbledon Champion.
DJOKOVIC* 5 FEDERER 4 (final set of five) Novak gets the wrong end of a narrow Hawkeye and challenges unsuccessfully. 0-15. At 15-15, Roger comes in on the ND second serve. Overhead... ooooh, into the net. Chance there for Roger. Hard shot. But still. Djokovic wins this game to 15, Roger having a good old go at several serves but not really at the races.
DJOKOVIC 4 FEDERER* 4 (final set of five) 18-shot rally goes Novak's way, but Roger regains parity with a crisp winner on the next. 15-15. This is a mighty return from Djokovic though, and nothing Roger can do. Another wonderful return, Roger has to play a very difficult shot at his feet and it's suddenly 15-40. Is this it? Fine return again and it's only an inch away from slipping over the net. It doesn't. Now Roger lamps Nole's service return crosscourt for 40-40. That's two break points saved but there's soon another one after Roger unwisely dishes one up to Novak's backhand. Break point, 40-A.... and Roger serve volleys on his second serve. Just delightful work from Rog as he comes in and volleys the ball off his toes. Wins the next point too. But we're going to need a third deuce, thanks to a pounding groundstroke from ND. Unreturned serve. What a game this is! Roger could do with a first serve or two. Novak's all over his second serve like white on rice but he's now made a (relatively) unforced error. Roger Federer holds serve but by heaven he had to work for it.
DJOKOVIC* 4 FEDERER 3 (final set of five) Pressure, for now, is on Novak. Roger holding serves with aplomb. Novak having to work. Double fault. Weak second serve, Roger comes to the net, but Novak passes him with a lovely shot. Nice passer of his own brings Roger to 30-30 though. And now Novak has hit a limp, tired shot into the net. I say! Novak, come on son. 30-40. Good point from Novak, and he's saved the BP with some precision groundstrokes. Wins the next one to take it to A-40, and now we're back to the earlier pattern of ND bombing the RF backhand... but this time it is Novak who cracks. Deuce. He serves it out. Strength of character, and good tactics to come forward in this game. JImmy Connors "ND is only attacking when he is behind - what's wrong with doing it when you're ahead?" Frankline Ogongi writes:
I really appreciate the live commentary from you Allan. I am in Nairobi, Kenya and none of the TV stations are showing the game. Your commentaries are the only way I'm connected to the millions of tennis fans following this game. Fantastic game from both players. Really impressed by RF comeback. Hope he wins it today.
DJOKOVIC 3 FEDERER* 3 (final set of five) The court bathed in sunlight now, a shadow just at one corner. Some brilliant running from Novak in the second point but it ends with Roger calmly, icily dropping a volley into the front of the court as if to say "if you hadn't bottled it, you wouldn't still be running about, would you?" Ace. Another imperious hold from Roger, to love. Two emails in as many minutes from India! Here's Guy Perry
Tap away, Alan. Great work in the blog. Following you in the stormy monsoon night in Kerala.
DJOKOVIC* 3 FEDERER 2 (final set of five) Chance for the Fed at 0-15 but he cannot punish ND for coming into the net behind a poor approach. Novak soon at 30-15, in part thanks to a succesful challenge on the baseline. None of Novak's first four serves find the mark in this game. A long, savage rally ends with Novak volleying into the empty court. Poor Roger. Exhausting. 40-15. Novak hammers home the point with an ace and that game was a bit of a body blow for the Swiss.
DJOKOVIC 2 FEDERER* 2 (final set of five) Thing about live blogging tennis, which I don't do very often, is that it happens so damn quickly. In the time it has taken me to type this paragraph, the players have got back on the court, and Roger Federer has won a service game. Novak couldnae get into any of the rallies there. Harry writes:
I'm following your commentary from India (no access to tv). Was jumping up & down for that comeback from RF & my roommate is like, 'dude what's the deal?' & I'm like, 'Dude, RF is playing a classic in a long while, what more you want.' Thanks for your wonderful commentary Alan. Come on Rogeeerrr...
DJOKOVIC* 2 FEDERER 1 (final set of five) Novak aces the first couple but hits a tired shot wide. Is Novak moving a little tenderly? He looks a bit sore. Now Roger has laced a ball past him, Novak could not move for it. At 40-30, there is a worry for him, but he settles this with another ace. However, he has called for the trainer. Medical timeout, right calf by the looks. Never thought we would say this, but at the moment, Roger looks fitter, stronger and fresher. Perhaps having been on the brink has given him an adrenalin boost?
DJOKOVIC 1 FEDERER* 1 (final set of five) Roger rattles through a service game of his own, both men just quietly positioning their chess pieces, as it were, for the battle ahead.
DJOKOVIC* 1 FEDERER 0 (final set of five) Novak, who would not be human if he wasn't thinking about having been 5-2 up in the last set, serves. He's more or less superhuman though, isn't he? Wins this service game no dramas.
17.27 The players take a quick break. It's Djokovic to serve. Where's your money?
Federer wins the fourth set and it's 2-2 Well you don't win 17 Grand Slams without having guts, and that is a magnificent fight-back from R-Fed. How does Novak Djokovic respond?
DJOKOVIC 5 FEDERER* 7 (Djokovic leads 2-1) Rare sight: there's a player at the net but it is not Roger Federer. It's Jeremy Bates! No, of course not. It's Novak Djokovic. Roger has a chance to pass him but nets it. He wins the next two points though, one of them with an ace, and it is 30-15. Roger wins the next one, slight mis-hit but good enough, and serves this game out with, given the circumstances, something like calm. Game and fourth set to Roger Federer.
DJOKOVIC* 5 FEDERER 6 (Djokovic leads 2-1) Novak serving. Roger not afraid to stick to his guns and come to the net. It's 0-15. And the pressure is now on Novak, the man who served for the title and had a match point in the last game. He's double faulted. 0-30. And now he has hit a regulation ball long. It's 0-40 and is Novak thinking about his recent Grand Slam record (lost last three finals..)? Shows his guts now with two solid, ungettable serves. A very long rally ends with Novak Djokovic hitting a forehand over the baseline and,would you believe it, he's lost this game as well. Federer breaks serve
DJOKOVIC 5 FEDERER* 5 (Djokovic leads 2-1) Oooh, classy. Classy. Novak hits a wonderful passing winner, his 15th of the match, Roger has only managed a couple. At 30-15, Roger goes for a big second serve... and double faults. His fifth of the match. Now Roger has hit a relatively regulation shot into the net and suddenly is facing a match point at 30-40. Roger sends an ace down the middle - that is called out. Challenges. That looks in. It is in! Deuce. What minerals... Another ace. But some great returning from Novak and it's 40-40. Roger crunches a forehand home to go to A-40. Novak cannot return the next one, Roger has won three games in a row
DJOKOVIC* 5 FEDERER 4 (Djokovic leads 2-1) Okay Novak Djokovic. Can you serve for the championship? He has agolden opportunity on the first point when Roger's flappy return sits up and begs. Novak's hit it long! Pressure. Pressure, that most crushing and fascinating of sporting sensations. He's lost the next point as well and it is 0-30. Steadies himself for a good serve and it's 15-30. Next serve is a mile long. At 30-30, Roger gambles and attacks and Novak has put a backhand out to give Roger a break point. 30-40. Novak puts the first serve out, challenges, and is unsuccessful. Roger goes after the second serve, wonderful point from Roger and he's managed to win it with a running forehand. A lesson in matchplay from Roger, he sensed the negatvitiy and fear in Novak and he went on the attack and he has broken back
DJOKOVIC 5 FEDERER* 3 (Djokovic leads 2-1) Okay Roger Federer. Serving to stay in the match. Serves and volleys to take the first point. Soon he's 30-0 up. No dramas here please, just get through this game. yes, 40-0 now with an assured serve. Roger chips the ball back long and it's 40-15 but an unreturned serve soon wraps up one of those quiet games you sometimes get when both players know that it's the next one that really counts, if you see what I mean.
DJOKOVIC* 5 FEDERER 2 (Djokovic leads 2-1) Djokovic is a freak. He is actually a freak. A long, long rally with Federer carving out these huge forehands, and Djokovic haring after them, shovelling them out from the baseline and just hitting them back even harder. Finally, finally, the pressure tells and Roger hits one out. Fed has his moments in this game and at 15-30 ND has his back to the wall but Roger hits a ball into the net. Novak closes the game out and he is on the brink. Huge hold after those three breaks in a row.
DJOKOVIC 4 FEDERER* 2 (Djokovic leads 2-1) A nice smash from Roger takes him to 30-15 but a rare lapse of judgement as he leaves a passing shot down the line and howls, as soon as it goes past him he knows it is going in. At 30-30 Roger seems a bit put off by someone in the crowd and at 30-40 it is all back in the mix. Oh Roger. No! His second serve is punished by Novak and Djokovic breaks serve.
DJOKOVIC* 3 FEDERER 2 (Djokovic leads 2-1) Roger wins the first point with some classy play and now Novak has hit a ball long to the Fed backhand, Novak challenges but this always looks out... it is and it is 0-30. Is this the moment for Roger? It feels like it might be. Novak gets the next one but now a point that has Roger's fans on their feet, he's camped at the net and volleying away like his life depends on it. Novak's heroic defence keeps him in it for a while but Fed keeps at it and he's won the point. And now he has hit a forehand winner and he has broken Djokovic straight back. That is absolute quality, and magnificent heart, to break straight back against the younger man. There was nothing wrong with Djokovic's play in that game but Federer just showed such class and such heart to somehow break him just when it looked like Novak was about to roll him over. This match is turning into a classic.
DJOKOVIC 3 FEDERER* 1 (Djokovic leads 2-1) Novak smells blood. Double fault from Roger and now he hits a tired shot out. 0-30. Are there a few drops of rain? Roger could really do with it. Now Roger has hit a tired, loose shot well wide and suddenly he's on the ropes at 0-40 and a set down. The great man rallies to win the next point. Come on Roger! And now a precise, nerveless smash takes him to 30-40. Can he get out of jail? Comes to the net, Novak tries a low-percentage passing shot and it's well wide. That's deuce. But a long, brutal rally now, Djokovic just too good and too strong in this one. Another break point. Second serve. Djokovic moving the better now, always feels that he is on top in the rallies, and eventually even Roger cannot live with him, hitting a forehand long and Djokovic breaks
DJOKOVIC* 2 FEDERER 1 (Djokovic leads 2-1) First signs of a possible bit of tiredness, lapse of concentration, not sure if either of those are justifiable actually, but something odd with Roger in that game. Couple of slightly sloppy shots and that's as easy a game as ND could wish for.
DJOKOVIC 1 FEDERER* 1 (Djokovic leads 2-1) Another slip for Djokovic, hyperextends the left leg, he's stretching it out througout the game. Roger with a solid service game and a fiery ace. Here's the skidmark, as it were, of ND there. He slid for that ball like it was a clay court.
DJOKOVIC* 1 FEDERER 0 (Djokovic leads 2-1) So what can Roger do to get back into this match? Not a lot in this game, game to love, the Fed backhand under strain.
Some numbers. How often do you serve 83% and lose?
TIE BREAK: Roger takes the first point with his fastest serve of the tournament so far, 128mph I think. Novak bombs down a couple though, and there's nothing doing with those. Roger has dropped one of his points, he was in two minds about whether to go in behind the serve and Novak has a minibreak and wiil serve at 3-2.
This feels like a big moment! Roger has a chance to attack the second serve of Djokovic, but he's hit a kicking serve out of the back of the court.
Roger's hit a ball right to the very back of the court. It is called long. Federer has challenged. The umpire has overturned the call and Federer has the point! He is back in this at 4-3 and serving. Djokovic to his credit just shrugs and moves on.
But now Roger tenses up and flaps a forehand long. The momentum is back with Novak. Serving at 5-4. Novak has soon taken that to 6-4 with some overpowering forehand play. Punishing, hard-charging poiunt from Djokovic and Roger cracks, hitting the ball wide and that is the tie-break and third set to Djokovic
DJOKOVIC* 6 FEDERER 6 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4) Not really, is the answer. It's 40-0 in a trice and although Roger gets his name on the board at 40-15 he's soon hit a backhand long and, as we expected, it is the tie-break.
DJOKOVIC 5 FEDERER* 6 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4) Rare second serve from Roger and Novak pounces on it, punishing winner to take us to 30-15. Djokovic annoyed that someone in the crowd has said something as he goes for a ball and the umpire does that thing where he tells everyone off and then some people in the crowd do that thing where they all clap like smug little suck up nice boy and girl teacher's pets and I do that thing where I think about very loud punk rock music and smashing Volvos and Marks and Spencer ready-mixed bucks fizz bottles up with a sledgehammer but soon we're back on Centre Court and Roger, weirdly, has served a double fault. Djokovic with a timely challenge has won a point and has forced this to deuce from seemingly nowhere. The pressure is on Roger now, Novak senses the moment. Deuce again. Ace to Roger, this set suddenly an absolute streetfight after a classy if somehow bloodless few games. Roger's serve tested to the limit there but he managed to find just about enough every time and he holds. Can he now put Novak under similar strain or will we have the tie-break that felt inevitable throughout this set?
DJOKOVIC* 5 FEDERER 5 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4)Novak serves to stay in the set. Roger goes after the first point but cannot do much. The movement in the second point from both players is truly special, Roger with some excellent volleying and movement but Novak squeaks a wonderful pasisng shot by him. Next point, arguably even better, Roger approaching and volleying out of the top drawer, but another suerpb passing shot from Novak. Wow. This is class from both guys. 40-0. Game to Novak but "at least Roger is putting this in his mind with the net tactic" says Tim Henman.
DJOKOVIC 4 FEDERER* 5 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4) Hard to see anyone getting a break point at the moment, let alone a break of serve. Roger's serving in this is without flaw.
DJOKOVIC* 4 FEDERER 4 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4) Djokovic whistles through a game. Jane writes:
Thanks for intelligent comments. Great photo of Federer on your page - chapeau to Carl the photographer. For your fun questions, my contributions -
Who will win? Federer, as he hit an ace on the first game of the second set after the tie break, and despite losing the game, kept going ....
Who is the greatest -can I go for a mix of Rod Laver, Pancho Gonzalez, Bob Hewitt, Martina Navratilova, Chris Evert (for her brain), McEnroe, Borg, Sampras ....Nadal is surpreme on clay. Sampras was surpreme on grass/in New York.
From previous eras - any of the above with today's training skills and equipment.
The Scot Andy Murray lost one match. He is still (until tonight) Wimbledon champion, and will be again. Let's remember his first match last week walking on Centre Court as Champion. He will be back - especially if he works on the aspects of his game he considers he needs to.
DJOKOVIC 3 FEDERER* 4 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4)Wonderful athleticism from Roger on an overhead shot, arcing his back. Again this service game is completed with precision and authority.
DJOKOVIC* 3 FEDERER 3 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4) Can Roger get something going at the start of this game? He comes in behind a serve and wins the first point. But now a minor bit of controversy as a shot from Fed is wrongly called long as Djokovic hits his reply wide. They replay the point. Novak wins it. Roger shaking his head. Put it out of your mind, Roger. Both players' rhythm possibly a little upset by that, this is a lower quality game. Novak drains a simple ball into the net. But a big serve now. And Roger cannot do much with the next one either and that's game Novak. Federer still smarting about that questionable call at 0-15.
DJOKOVIC 2 FEDERER* 3 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4) Roger purrs through another service game, they're both serving in the high sixties in terms of serves in. Even Djokovic can't do too much in terms of returning here. I feel that the quick games probably more to Roger's advantage than Novak's.
DJOKOVIC* 2 FEDERER 2 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4) Djokovic, likewise, with a top class service game, there's really not too much for Roger to get involved with there.
DJOKOVIC 1 FEDERER* 2 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4) That break in the second set aside, Roger has been getting the serve going well . He's rattled through this game to love. The quality of this match is astonishingly high yet, almost so much so that the levels of drama are as yet relatively modest.
DJOKOVIC* 1 FEDERER 1 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4) Shot of the match so far, for my money, as Federer comes to the net behind a nice approach shot, Djokovic picks a wonderful crosscourt, dipping shot, all touch and angle not power, and that gives him the game.
DJOKOVIC 0 FEDERER* 1 (First set Federer 7-6; Second set Djokovic 6-4) Roger takes the first game of the third set. Couple of aces and some easy pickin's off a Djoko lob take it to 40-0 but Djokovic makes him work a little as he picks off a couple of groundstrokes, but Fed's serve kills any hopes of an early break.
15.45 DJOKOVIC v FEDERER; it's one set all. Quick comfort break for Djokovic.
DJOKOVIC* 6 FEDERER 4 (Federer leads one set to love: 7-6) Rogers goes after the first return, swings but hits it wide. But he's able to get the better of the next rally. 15-15. Tough wide serve next, Roget getting no chance on that one. 30-15. More equal in the next rally though, and Djoko has put a groundstroke into the tramlines. 30-30. Roger can only pop up the next service return... but Djokovic has got too long to think about i! He drills the ball wide and long with the court gaping. Break point to Roger, his first of the match. But a clinical effort from Djokovic, quality serve and he puts away a soft return. 40-40. Now Djokovic thunders an ace down the middle. The next point is all Djokovic, Roger defending gamely but he's only ever clinigng on, lobbing desperately as Djokovic smashes him. Soon, it's over. Djokovic wins the second set 6-4
DJOKOVIC 5 FEDERER 4* (Federer leads one set to love: 7-6) That's what Roger needed, a quick cheap service game to set him up for what looks a tall order: breaking the Djokovic serve to stay in this second set.
DJOKOVIC* 5 FEDERER 3 (Federer leads one set to love: 7-6) Djokovic slips again, the exact spot that he fell in earlier. But he shakes that off. More long rallies in this game, which Novak wins to 15. The sense is that the tide is turning Novak's way. Roger surrenders this game slightly tamely. Hard to see RF breaking at the moment.
DJOKOVIC 4 FEDERER* 3 (Federer leads one set to love: 7-6) Roger holds his own serve well enough but he's not been able to have much of an impact on his opponent's serve. The longer rallies are starting to go the way of ND.
DJOKOVIC* 4 FEDERER 2 (Federer leads one set to love: 7-6) Phew, this is a gruelling encounter already. I need a banana. Djokovic breezes through a quick service game.
An infrared camera was used for this Getty images pic
DJOKOVIC 3 FEDERER* 2 (Federer leads one set to love: 7-6) Roger needs a quickie here and gets one.
DJOKOVIC* 3 FEDERER 1 (Federer leads one set to love: 7-6) Djokoivc, serving with a break in the bag, sends down some impressive fare to move swiftly to 30-0. Now an ace. I was just about to say that Djoko is cruising this game but suddenly from 0-40 he's let it slip to deuce. Real chances for Rogers in this deuce rally, he's the one moving the opponent around the court, but Djokovic hangs tough and Fed has put a backhand into the net. Second deuce, though, when a Djokovic forehand goes long. Roger has a chance here but Djokovic gambles on the direction of a drop volley and guesses correctly. A-40 but Federer produces a belting groundstroke. This game is already six minutes and counting. Eventually Federer puts a running forehand into the net and Djokovic holds serve. 24 minutes for three games in this set so far. You would have to fancy that the longer it goes, the better for Djokovic. This match has the feeling of the classic about it.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Steven Finn - How sexy is Federers' backhand.&lt;/noframe&gt;
DJOKOVIC 2 FEDERER* 1 (Federer leads one set to love: 7-6) Djoko brings some hustle and he's taken the first two points of this Fed game. Roger gets back into it though, with an ace. This is a really top quality game, both players trading massive groundstrokes and Djokovic overpowers Fed to take it to 40-40. Djokovic turning the screw in this game, and Roger serves a double fault. Not such a great serve at 40-A and Federer ought not to have come in behind that I feel; Djokovic hits a magnificent crosscourt passing backhand that leaves Federer nowhere - and gives Djokovic a break of serve. Djokovic gets a bit of treatment from the trainer but seems precautionary rather than anything else.
DJOKOVIC* 1 FEDERER 1 (Federer leads one set to love: 7-6) That last game... a lesser man would have his confidence knocked by that, after the disappointment of missing out in the TB, and then the slip and missing a couple of chances. Only a fool would question Djokovic's relish for fighting back from adversity. Wins the next game with something to spare. But has called for the trainer...
DJOKOVIC 0 FEDERER* 1 (Federer leads one set to love: 7-6) The players trade delicate running volleys in a charming point that goes the way of Djokovic to make it 30-30. But now Federer has made a blunder and it's 40-30. Break point against Roger. And second serve too. Djokovic angry with himself as he hits a return waaaay long. That's deuce. He keeps the pressure on with a spanking double handed backhand passing shot. Second break point. Long rally, Djoko attacking the Fed backhand, doens't really go for the kill though, and eventually hits one into the net cord. Lifts his eyes to the heavens. And now he's down! Novak slips on the baseline. He's okay. Wins the next one with a crunching line drive and it's back to 40-40. Federer closes it out, saving two BPs on the way. 96th service game of the tournament for Roger, he's only lost one. Novak stretching out his leg a little gingerly.
15.03 Djokovic had the better of that set but has lost the set on tie-break. Gut shot for Novak, he played seriously classy tennis but got pipped.
TIE BREAK: Roger takes his first point with ease and is able to put Novak under big pressure in the next with a long groundstroke rally, Djokovic attacking Roger's backhand but cracking first as he hits a forehand wide. 2-0 Roger. And ace for Roger makes it 3-0. Despite brave defence from RF, Novak wins the next two points with some ease.
Federer 3-2 up and serving with a minibreak. Wins the next one as ND hits a simple one into the net. 4-2 Federer as they change ends. Nole working that Fed backhand and the next rally sees the Swiss under pressure. Novak wins this point as Roger slices a backhand wide, it's 4-3 Fed and it's back on serve. Djoko wins the next point as well, 4-4 with another Federer backhand error. Third point in a row to Djokovic and that's 5-4 to Djokovic,
Federer under pressure now but he wins the next, despite some wonderful Nole defence. 5-5. But a wonderful return from Djokovic, sensational forehand from wide and Federer is undone by a ball at his feet. It's 6-5 to Djokovic and he has set point. A "come on!" from Roger as he wins the next point.
It's 6-6 in the tie-break and Djokovic serves. Roger comes to the net to attack the second serve but cannot. 7-6 to Novak but an ace to Roger makes it 7-7. Adds an unreturned serve now and that's 8-7 to Federer with a set point to him now.
Djokovic has hit a groundstroke into the net and Federer has won the first set 9-7 on tie-break. The crowd roar.
DJOKOVIC 6 FEDERER* 6 Insouciant drop shot from Fed bounces on the net and drops over, that was a bit too cool for skool, even for Roger. He acknowledges his bit of luck. Wins the game comfortably enough and that is a tie-break.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Mohandas Menon - The on-going &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23Wimbledon2014" target="_blank"&gt;#Wimbledon2014&lt;/a&gt; final is the first Grand Slam final since the US Open 2009 not to feature either Rafael Nadal or Andy Murray.&lt;/noframe&gt;
DJOKOVIC* 6 FEDERER 5 First hint of a sniff of a chance for Roger as Nole makes an error, hitting a forehand long and it's 30-30. Djokovic looks up at his team. Brilliance from Federer as he makes a wonderful shot down the line and then scurries back to bury a volley. 40-40 A Djokovic serve in this game called out, wrongly.. But it's no great matter because Djokovic punishes a couple of pressurised returns. Game.
Some of this tennis has been nearly as impressive as John Hurt's moustache.
DJOKOVIC 5 FEDERER* 5 Djoko shows that he's not going to let Roger have all the fun at the net, coming in to wrong-foot Roger with a delicate shot and make it 15-30. BIg point. Long rally, but the Federer sliced backhand serves him well and eventually Novak nets a ball. Long rally with Djokovic getting on top, pressure on Roger, but Novak has hit a backhand into the net. 40-30 and Roger has an ideal chance to get out of a slightly concerning game unscathed. But he plonks a drive volley out, with the court gaping. Magnificent point at 40-40, Federer with probing angled shots and the tigerish Djokovic defence in full effect. Eventually Roger wins the point and takes the next one cheaply. Tough game for Federer, he cannot afford too many of them against the younger man...
DJOKOVIC* 5 FEDERER 4 At 0-15, it's the longest rally of the match so far, absolute quality, some lovely sliced backhands being played. Rog eventually drains a ball into the net, shame. But at 15-15, Djoko misses a regulation volley. Couple of aces get him out of a hole. Ice cool.
DJOKOVIC 4 FEDERER* 4 Federer send Djoko out wide and comes in behind to win a quick point. Now a 127mph ace down the middle, his fastest serve of the tournament so far. Gets to 40-30 but then hits a groundstroke long, under relatively little pressure. Wide serve takes it to A-40. Slamming forehand seals the deal and it’s game Fed.
DJOKOVIC* 4 FEDERER 3 Djokovic has got nine first serves in and won all of them. We've had no break points as yet. Nothing even close to one on a Djokovic serve.
DJOKOVIC 3 FEDERER* 3 A double fault from Roger takes it to 15-15. Wins the next point easily and then comes in behind the next point. Unreturnable serve. Roger might be overdoing the serve and volley though, comes in behind the next one as well and Novak crunches the ball past him, bit of an open goal actually on that one. Roger takes the game no worries but just an early warning that he cannot serve and volley willy-nilly.
DJOKOVIC* 3 FEDERER 2 Absolutely nothing doing on the Djokovic serve, power, accuracy, calm decisions. Rattles through the game.
DJOKOVIC 2 FEDERER* 2 Thunderous forehand from Djokovic wins the first point, came so hard at Federer's feet he could hardly get his racket down in time. Serve and volley from Rog at 30-15, delightful backhand smash gives him that point and he closes out the game no problem. Over to you, Sophia Canonaco:
Hard to call, probably as I'm still getting over Jimmy Connors' and Sue Barker's matching blue outfits. Sue must have been spitting nails when she saw him. Jimmy looks like he got lost on the way to the pantomime.... Anyway, I think Novak will just do it, but want Roger to win just one more time.
DJOKOVIC* 2 FEDERER 1 Novak takes that service game to love. Authority.
DJOKOVIC 1 FEDERER* 1 Roger has Djokovic scurring around the back of the court on the first two points, which Roger wins in some style. An overhead shot is too short from Roger and Novak wins that. Now a superb rally, wonderful defence from Djokovic and he eventually plays a neat drop shot that takes it to 30-30. Roger cannot finish the game off though and there's a first deuce. Takes him wide on the serve and kills the point quickly, think that is going to be important for the older man. Unreturnable serve seals it. Both players into the good stuff right away.
DJOKOVIC* 1 FEDERER 0 (* denotes server) Novak wins the first game to 15, the first couple of points are long-ish rallies, all played from the back of the court.
14.08 Let's get to it.
14.04 So where's your money? Novak's about 6/4 on at the bookies, Roger 11/8. in 2011, when Novak was so imperious, and last year when Roger's back seemed busted, who would have thought that we would be playing this final in 2014 and that it would be so hard to call.
14.03 Players are warming up. Novak won the toss and will serve. Arun Prasanna writes:
Roger federer will win today he is in greatest form and he is playing some aggressive tennis.
13.58 Excellent graphic from the BBC about Roger's changing tactics over the years
13.57 The umpire today is James Keothavong, brother of former British number one Anne.
13.56 Just needs someone setting up a table right at the front for Roger in Ray Liotta mode.
13.55 I really like this tracking shot that the BBC do as they follow the players around the clubhouse (?) and out onto the court. Goes on for ages. It's like Goodfellas or something.
13.52 Pertinent question from Kevin Berry
I think this will have a large bearing on who wins, for me open = Novak: closed = roger
Well, open as it stands.
13.50 Wimbledon always inspires plenty of Brits into a one-a-year visit to the council courts. Try these exercises to make the most of your game.
13.47 John McEnroe shakes Jimmy Connors' hand and says what an education playing with him was, or words to that effect. "What about our rivalry? You're making us look bad," says Jimmy.
13.46 Prince William and Kate arrive. "They've been busy," agree Jimmy Connors and John McEnroe. They were at the Tour de France yesterday, weren't they? Nice work if you can get it.
13.44 Federer: "I am happy that I decided to go down the road of working incredibly hard, I think that is what allowed me to start making miraculous shots." I think that people mistake some of things he says for arrogance. It's not that. He just sometimes finds himself awestruck by himself, which is not the same thing.
13.41 Interestingly, Novak is bidding to be the first top seed to win Wimbledon since 2007, when it was won by one R Federer. Zack Goldring writes:
I’m a huge Nole fan, but Federer in the final at Wimbledon? I’m afraid history shows Nole deep in his heart believes Roger is the better player – and so does Roger!
13.38 McEnroe on the supercoach thing, says that "this is a really good thing for Edberg. He lives in a small Swedish town with 4000 people in it. There are three times as many in this court." This is a new angle: coaching Federer as a treatment for agoraphobia?
13.35 Interview with Novak, who has that eerie mixture of pleasantness and steely determination.
13.30 Jimmy Connors. My goodness. That blazer. He looks like a children's TV Johnny Cash.
13.22 Rishi interviews with ball boys, groundsmen now. Ah look, Sir David Beckham. And now Matthew Syed's doing a piece about pressure that the players face on Centre Court in the finals.
13.19 Richard K fancies Roger to win, he says. "Roger is a good front-runner. Novak goes flat in the second set, he needs to eat some sugar or something! He always gives his opponent a chance."
13.16 Boris looks quite tense. He declines to go into the specifics of what he has advsied Novak, fair enough.
13.13 Djokovic has lost five of his last six Grand Slam finals.
13.10 Quality punditry from Krajicek, explaining how Edberg has got Roger to flatten out his backhand, as seen in previous match, and how this can help to pressure Novak. I was enjoying that, but the TV coverage has now cut away to interviewing some celebrities about how they think the match will go. Sigh. It's not sport unless Someone Famous is watching. Samuel L Jackson first and then, in fairness, some previous Wimbledon heroes, including Rod Laver so I guess we will allow it, but I have noticed quite a few people of late grumbling about how the Beeb coverage has got too Hello! magazine-y of late. I guess all media are just as guilty really. Thoughts?
13.07 Serene progress for Roger throughout the tournament, five hours fewer on court than Novak this tournament. "Not significant for me," says Richard Krajicek. "Because that [endurance] is Novak's game. If it was the other way round, then sure."
13.04 And yet for me, and for perhaps 4/5ths of the crowd in Centre Court today, he is the second favourite to Roger. Surely the most beautiful player who ever lived, a complete player and a complete champion in every sense. Hard not to gush really, but the way that his will to win and desire for self-improvement seem only to grow in his 33rd year are inspiring and awesome. A genuinely amazing sportsman.
13.02 I am a huge admirer of Novak. Aside from the techincal excellence, I love the way that he raises his game the harder things get, he actually seems to relish and enjoy the pressure. He's brilliant, he's intelligent, he's a gentleman, and he is a great champion.
13.00 To business. What a final. What a pair of men these are. Who do you want to win?
12.51 Wombles were quite sweet though.
Apologies to any foreign readers who have no idea about the peculiar looking creature below. That's Vinnie Jones, who played football for Wimbledon in a famously brutal and brutish 1980s team. The other ones are Wombles, who were children's cartoon characters in the early 1980s. They were quite ahead of their time actually. They were environmental little things that lived on Wimbledon Common and foraged for things that they reused.
12.50 But all things considered, you have to prefer this...
12.45 ... as well as this...
12.40 Ah, Wimbledon. Famous for this...
12.30 Got this one off Rain Today. It's of now-ish, and it shows that the main band of rain has swept up the East and missed London, so fingers crossed for that. Wimbles is to the South West of the city.
12.25 Hoping that the weather will hold. Trying to find some rain radar pics.
12.21 What of the weather forecast? We're expecting clouds, 68 degrees. Chance of showers.
12.20 And here's Oliver Brown on Federer.
The man is a metronome, albeit one of supremely elegant Swiss craftsmanship.
It is no wonder that Rolex continues to pay him £1 million a year, when every one of his matches on the lawns this summer has run like exquisite clockwork.
12.00 You'll be wanting the expert view of the players' chances in this match and where the key battles might be fought. Here is Greg Rusedski with just such a helpful item.
From Roger Federer's perspective, if he wins his 18th major here, it will make Rafael Nadal's chances of catching him much more remote. The old master will have the crowd at his back, and Novak Djokovic will be very much the villain, just as he was in the final against Andy Murray last year.
For Djokovic, though, the pressure is perhaps even greater. He has lost five out of the past six grand slam finals he has played. So he will have a massive psychological hurdle to jump over before he has even started.
Well worth a read and especially good on the mental battles, I thought.
11.40 Very shortly, as it turns out. Hello everyone and welcome to our live blog of the Wimbledon men’s final. Any major match involving two of the big four is always worth a watch, and given that a Wimbledon title is at stake, it's surely about as good as it gets. So many fascinating aspects to consider: can the 32-year-old Roger Federer live with the freakihly durable Novak Djokovic if the match goes long? How will the game's finest returner deal with the Fed serve, perhaps the best serve the game has seen bar Pete Sampras. How will the influence of coaches Stefan Edberg (Roger) and Boris Becker (Novak) come into play?
We'll discuss those questions and many more - including the debate over which of these is the greater - over the next couple of hours.
Alan will be here shortly for build-up and the best game-by-game report of today's mouthwatering Wimbledon men's singles final.
In the meantime, here is an extract from our tennis correspondent Simon Briggs' preview:
It is one of the great Wimbledon rivalries: a silky, enigmatic volleyer on one side, and an intense, glowering Mitteleuropean on the other. And that is only the coaches.
Roger Federer has played Novak Djokovic 35 times, but this will be the first time that both parties have been supported by their respective mentors, Stefan Edberg and Boris Becker. It feels like a flashback to the 1980s, when rallies lasted three shots and the barest part of the court was the "gathering point" on the T of the service box.
Clearly the advent of the "supercoach" phenomenon - which, lest we forget, was kick-started by Andy Murray's triumphant partnership with Ivan Lendl - is a boon for TV directors. But it is also changing the way modern tennis is played. Some of the magic of netplay is returning to a sport that had become overly wedded to the baseline.
Both Edberg and Becker have encouraged their charges to come forward wherever possible. As two of the greatest volleyers in history, they know there is an element of the chess gambit to a net-rush. Even if you lose the point, you are still messing with your opponent's mind, and the benefits are often reaped later.