In Swahili it means to think clearly. In Japanese it means good technique. In Detroit it means winner: Waza
The Detroit Waza Flo is the local Professional Arena Soccer League team. They are also the perennial champions of the PASL Eastern Division. However, these champions are not getting the respect they deserve.
“We win more consistently than the Tigers or Red Wings, but we get less respect than the dead-last Pistons,” said player/coach/owner Dominic Scicluna.
Sure they are not as famous as the Pistons, but the Waza Flo games can definitely rival the attendance at The Palace recently. They had to move out of the Taylor Sportsplex to an arena in Melvindale in order to accommodate the number of fans going to the games.
Last Sunday, Waza Flo had a game against the Cincinnati Kings for the right to play in the PASL championship. In front of a packed house, the score was 5-5 when, with 40 seconds left, Waza scored a goal to win 6-5.
Eleven goals in a soccer game sounds insane. However, it was actually a low scoring game by PASL standards. The games are played in hockey rinks covered in turf. The play is faster-paced than traditional soccer, and much like in hockey, the players go in and out of the game in shifts.
The game is also much more physical than traditional soccer, a bonus to those when distain the diving and acting in standard soccer.
“We play a style that is a mix of Latin flair, German organization and Netherlands striking,” said Scicluna, who is a good authority on high level soccer having played alongside such world superstars as Didier Drogba, Yaya Toure, Samuel Eto’o and Alex Song.
In addition to their success in games, the Waza Flo has had much success off the field.
The team runs a youth soccer organization called Waza FC, in which they teach kids the fundamentals of indoor soccer as well as life lessons along the way.
Scicluna also goes to local schools to show off his world-class freestyle soccer and give inspirational speeches to the students.
These appearances, along with sales from a line of eco-friendly cleaning products Scicluna has developed, are how the team is funded.
Players make from $100 per game and up, according to ability.
The Waza Flo is a family organization. It is owned by Dominic and his brother Mario and the general manager is another brother, Valentino.
A true international team, Waza has players from Africa, Eastern Europe, South America and all over the United States. Since everyone is so far away from home, Waza has become their new family.
Now Waza looks forward to playing the formidable San Diego Sockers.
The 13-time national champion Sockers recently set a U.S. pro sports record of 48 consecutive wins which was just broken Jan. 27 in an overtime loss to the Dallas Sidekicks in a 6-5 stunner.
Waza will face the Sockers Friday night at 7:30 p.m. at the Melvindale Arena in the finals of the US Open Cup, a tournament that includes non-professional teams
This year's Open Cup (the fifth annual) paired 26 teams from the PASL, the Premier Arena Soccer League and independent teams across the country in qualifying rounds of a knockout style tourney that led to Detroit facing San Diego in what promises to be a real barn-burner.
The last time these two teams paired up on the pitch was 2012's national final – the Ron Newman Cup – held in San Diego's legendary Del Mar Arena.
Detroit fell to San Diego 10-7 in the contentious, foul-filled battle.
"We have been waiting for a rematch the entire year", said Dominic Scicluna, "we are always confident with our Detroit home crowd behind us".
More information on Waza Flo, including video highlights and schedules is available on www.detroitwaza.com