Pep Guardiola claimed local bragging rights over arch rival Jose Mourinho after his Manchester City side upset United 2-1 in the first ever Premier League clash between the pair.
Influential City midfielder Kevin De Bruyne opened the scoring and provided an assist for Kelechi Iheanacho when his shot rebounded off the post.
But a costly spill from debut keeper Claudio Bravo led to Zlatan Ibrahimovic pulling a goal back before the interval.
Bravo was fortunate to escape punishment for a rash tackle on Rooney, United substitute Marcus Rashford had a goal disallowed for offside and De Bruyne hit the post for a second time before the so-called 'noisy neighbours' held out for victory.
So it's Manchester City who continue their 100 per cent winning start under Pep Guardiola, with the City boss inflicting a first defeat on Jose Mourinho as Manchester United manager.
You can catch the post-match fallout on the homepage but now our live focus switches to the 3pm games.
Arsenal host Southampton while Stoke entertain Tottenham across six matches - join me for all the action on this link.
That's all from Old Trafford though.
90+6min: The free-kick is pumped long but despite Pogba beating Bravo to the ball, a City defender is available to hack the ball off the line.
90+5min: Final chance for United as Fernandinho is booked for hacking down a United midfielder in the City half.
90+3min: And was this it? Ibrahimovic's 23-yard shot deflects just wide of the near post for a corner, which from the set-piece results in Bravo being fouled following a challenge from Paul Pogba.
90+2min: Ibrahimovic slices well wide across goal as City survive the first part of stoppage time. I still feel there is one more chance in this for United though...
90min: Final change for Manchester City as Kevin De Bruyne, to the chants of City's grateful fans following his opening goal, departs in favour of Pablo Zabaleta.
There will be FIVE added minutes. There's a shake of the head from Sir Alex Ferguson inside the ground, not enough for the former United boss?
86min: Now it seems City's attacking for the day is done. Manchester United are pressing for a late equaliser as Fernandinho hacks the ball clear inside the six-yard box with Rooney poised to head home. We are set for some finale.
83min: Bravo, credit to his confidence, is sticking with Plan A of never kicking the ball long but it still doesn't look convincing.
After taking another passback, he turns Wayne Roone before playing the ball out wide and getting hacked out by the striker who to no one's surprise is booked.
81min: Full back Luke Shaw departs for Manchester United as warm applause greets Anthony Martial on to the pitch, shortly before cries of 'attack, attack, attack!' from the Manchester United crowd.
79min: Free-kick to City after Rooney makes a careless trip on the edge of the box but De Bruyne can only fire well over the bar. Martial is now stripped down ready to come on and boost a United attack that has started to lag a little.
78min: City are certainly not in the business of hanging on for what they have got, but you feel United are not done yet.
Anthony Martial looks like he could be coming on very shortly.
75min: Off the post! It's just end-to-end right now! Manchester City counter with David Silva's perfectly weighted through ball into the box finding Kevin De Bruyne.
The forward fires in a low shot towards the near post, where it hits the upright and rolls across the line before drifting just wide.
It's pretty tense in the #ManchesterDerby. Just ask @rioferdy5...! #MUNMCI pic.twitter.com/YOQc8pgVIy
72min: Brave keeping from David De Gea keeps Nicolas Otamendi at bay from close range, as he denies the City defender at point blank range following a corner.
70min: Big let-off for City! Communication between John Stones and Bacary Sagna completely broke down as Rashford is allowed to sprint to a long ball over the top.
The striker cuts inside on his right foot but despite his shot deflecting in off Ibrahimovic into the back of the net, the Swedish striker is offside.
10 - Leroy Sané is the 10th player to make his Premier League debut in the Manchester derby. Baptism.
68min: Meanwhile in Manchester, City have finally settled in this half. And it's no coincidence that comfort has finally come as they get the ball as far away from Bravo as possible.
It's been close to a perfect afternoon for Celtic, who welcome Rangers back to the Scottish Premiership with a five-star thumping. Stuart Armstrong gets on the score sheet late on.
60min: On the hour Guardiola makes his second change as Leroy Sane makes his debut in place of Raheem Sterling
Bravo lucky to get away with another crazy manoeuvre - tackle on Rooney probably a foul anywhere else on pitch but no pen given
56min: What on earth is going on with Bravo! There's getting used to the English game and there's being just a calamity waiting to happen.
Controlling a backpass, his turn to then beat a United attacker sees him take a very heavy touch before he then dives in with a risky 50/50 challenge on Rooney.
He appears to win the ball and Clattenburg agrees, but it's hardly going to come as comfort to what is now a nervous City defence.
53min: Manchester United look a vastly improved outfit this half as they hurry City over the pitch.
Marouane Fellaini is rather unfortunate to pick up a booking after an innocuous looking elbow on Aleksandar Kolarov.
Pep Guardiola is already boosting his midfield, sending on Fernando for Kelechi Iheanacho.
Moussa Dembele won't need his wallet if he goes out for a drink on the green side of Glasgow this evening.
The striker has just bagged his hat-trick in the Old Firm derby after bringing down a cross from the right before applying a neat finish across goal.
51min: Into the book goes Ibrahimovic following a clip of the heels on Nicolas Otamendi after the defender won a 50-50 tussle for the ball on the byline.
United fans are not wasting any moment to get on Bravo's back, giving him a build up cheer every time he goes to kick the ball.
It seems to be affecting him too as he is yet to find a team-mate with a goal kick in this half.
'Wayne Rooney now wide, Paul Pogba further forward in No. 10 role and Ander Herrera holding.'
48min: Already Rashford springs to life, taking on the City defence before a cross for Ibrahimovic inside the box is deflected over the crossbar.
It's a nightmare debut for the former Arsenal defender who has been dismissed for a second yellow card for a deliberate handball. Old firm spoils heading for Celtic with just over ten minutes left as they still lead 3-1.
Manchester United make two changes at the break. Ander Herrera and Marcus Rashford replace Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Jesse Lingard - the two players that came into the United side today.
Both strikers have been on target in the first half but who has had the best of it? Iheanacho seems to have been involved in the game more but that was a clinical finish from Ibrahimovic to give United hope.
'Fascinating contest. City absolutely bossed the first half, but losing that goal before half-time was a real body blow.
'Yes, Claudio Bravo's distribution has been good but he's there to prevent goals and dropped a real clanger. United couldn't play much worse but will really have to raise their game.'
32 - There have been 32 goals in the last eight @premierleague derbies between @ManUtd & @ManCity at Old Trafford. Raining.
Manchester City utterly dominated that first half but some very dodgy keeping from Bravo has allowed United a route back into this match having been so comprehensibly played off the park.
Should be interesting to see how City approach the second half having dominated the first period. Also can Bravo keep his head after a very nervous 45 minutes as a City player?
Here is one team who have restored a two-goal lead. Scott Sinclair puts Celtic well in charge of the Old Firm derby after collecting a Moussa Dembele through ball before he fires in a low finish off the post.
45min: What is going on with Bravo? We are close to Massimo Taibi territory here as the City debutant fumbles the ball again in front of Ibrahimovic, who this time sees his low shot cleared off the line. I wonder if Hart is watching this game with a wry smile...
42min: Bring back Joe Hart! From a David Silva foul on Antonio Valencia (with the City midfielder booked) Wayne Rooney pumps a long ball into the box.
Claudio Bravo comes for the ball, flaps at it, and it allows Zlatan Ibrahimovic to fire into an open goal.
Guardiola is absolutely fuming with goal, with the foul, with Iheanacho for giving the ball away. Everything really.
'It’s feeling a bit 2010, Barca 5 Real 0, at the moment.'
36min: Fortune favours the brave is the saying, but it's more than bravery that sees City race into a 2-0 lead.
Kevin De Bruyne turns the United defence on the right side of the box before cutting on to his left foot and firing a shot across goal against the post.
The ball perfectly falls for Kelechi Iheanacho (played onside by Blind) who turns home the rebound.
'City looked remarkably comfortable at the moment but Pep still exhibiting frustration on the touchline. Probably feels they can exploit this period of superiority more than they are.'
32min: We are still yet to see Claudio Bravo have to make a save in the City goal, with United struggling to create any chances.
At least under Louis van Gaal they had the ball, even City are controlling most of that today with 69 per cent of it.
'So much for tiki taka – can’t beat long ball, flick on and finish.'
27min: Flashpoint two. Rooney is a little overzealous as he goes into a battle with Fernandinho over the ball, and he is rather lucky to avoid a booking.
The passion is there from the United skipper - but it's not exactly helping his temper.
24min: First flashpoint of the derby as Wayne Rooney appears to be a little impatient as he tries to wrestle the ball off Pep Guardiola, who isn't exactly keen to hand it to the United skipper.
Cheers go up from the Old Trafford crowd as Marcus Rashford begins to warm up. Understandable considering Zlatan Ibrahimovic has hardly had a kick.
21min: The sun is now out over Old Trafford but dark clouds are still looming over this United performance. City remain the better side inside the first 20 minutes as they look for a second goal.
Seriously good finish from De Bruyne. Open the body to give yourself options / keep the keeper guessing then whip it giving GK the eyes.
15min: Not exactly vintage Pep Guardiola but City will take this! Aleksandar Kolarov's long ball finds Kelechi Iheanacho who nods the ball on.
Daley Blind is caught static to it by an alert Kevin De Bruyne who then races in on goal by sliding home a lovely crisp finish into the bottom corner.
All bar one loud corner inside Old Trafford is silenced.
But wait, hope for Rangers! A cross to the back post is headed across goal by Kenny Miller before Joe Garner taps home in the final minute of the first half. It is now half-time.
A minute before the break and Celtic are flying. Moussa Dembele grabs his second of the game, leaving Philippe Senderos trailing before poking home a cool finish.
'Bright start by City here despite that promising effort from Pogba. Jose Mourinho kneels down in his technical area to scribble some notes on a pad he's left on the ground.'
8min: Warnings for City. United break before switching the ball to Henrikh Mkhitaryan, who then squares for Paul Pogba.
The £100million arrival from Juventus in the summer attempts to curl a side-foot shot into the top corner from 25 yards, but the ball always looked like it was sailing over the bar.
It's a lot sunnier at Parkhead and there are even some goals too now as Moussa Dembele heads Celtic in front after nodding home at the back post following a corner. It's been coming.
3min: It's Manchester United doing most of the early pressing but no chances come of it as an Antonio Valencia's charge down the right fails to result in a cross.
City soon respond though with Kevin de Bruyne getting behind the home defence before seeing a ball into the box fail to find a team-mate.
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more.
It goes without saying it's a sell-out and that a huge roar greets the teams on to the pitch. Kick-off on the way next at an overcast Theatre of Dreams...
JACK GAUGHAN: Zlatan Ibrahimovic's feud with Pep Guardiola simmered on Friday as the Manchester United striker aimed another volley at his former manager.
The pair's relationship broke down at Barcelona, with Ibrahimovic branding Guardiola a 'spineless coward' in his explosive autobiography and then later labelling him 'not a man'.
He was at it again before Saturday lunchtime's highly-anticipated Manchester derby, claiming that Jose Mourinho has superior man-management techniques.
'Not exactly a fulsome welcome for his old friend Pep Guardiola in Jose Mourinho’s programme notes. The words ‘Manchester City’ and ‘Pep Guardiola’ do not appear at all.'
'The thinking is lets see if they bring the full-backs inside or not,' Mourinho told Sky Sports.
'They are fast players, they are good at attacking spaces but it doesn't change a lot really. The structure of the team is the same.'
3 - Jose Mourinho has won just three of his 16 meetings in all competitions with Pep Guardiola (D6 L7). Rivals.
There is more than one derby today and the match is underway between Celtic and Rangers at Parkhead in the first Premiership Old Firm clash since April 2012.
This Saturday's Manchester derby has all the ingredients for a Premier League classic with Jose Mourinho locking horns with his rival Pep Guardiola for the first time in England.
World superstars such as Paul Pogba, Zlatan Ibrahimovic and David Silva will be on show at Old Trafford as the two sets of players aim to come away from the highly anticipated clash with all three points.
Here, Sportsmail takes a look at 10 classics between the Manchester teams during the Premier League era.
Manchester United host rivals City in the early Saturday kick-off, with fireworks expected for the Premier League affair at Old Trafford.With both clubs getting used to their decorated new head coaches, Jose Mourinho and Pep
Guardiola are set for another chapter in their bitter rivalry.As the managerial heavyweights prepare to blood their expensive summer recruits,
Sportsmail provides you with an ultimate guide to the battle of the bosses.
All set... COME ON CITY!! #utdvcity #mcfc pic.twitter.com/6mF23yJj3R
It's worth noting this is the most expensive Premier League line-up ever at a combined total of £565million - £278million of that United's.
Man Utd: de Gea, Valencia, Bailly, Blind, Shaw, Pogba, Fellaini, Mkhitaryan, Rooney, Lingard, Ibrahimovic.Subs: Mata, Martial, Smalling, Rashford, Romero, Ander Herrera, Schneiderlin.
Man City: Bravo, Sagna, Stones, Otamendi, Kolarov, De Bruyne, Fernandinho, Silva, Sterling, Iheanacho, Nolito.Subs: Zabaleta, Fernando, Caballero, Jesus Navas, Sane, Clichy, Garcia.
Referee: Mark Clattenburg (Tyne & Wear)
Teamsheets from Old Trafford. Rashford on the bench for United. pic.twitter.com/GgCpGn2d5Z
There are two changes in total for Manchester United to the team who secured a last gasp 1-0 at Hull City last time out.
Juan Mata and Anthony Martial drop out the side as Jesse Lingard and summer signing Henrikh Mkhitaryan come in.
Manchester City are without Sergio Aguero through a three match suspension, and the striker is replaced by Kelechi Iheanacho.
New signing Claudio Bravo replaces Willy Caballero in goal as full-backs Pablo Zabaleta and Gael Clichy are replaced by Bacary Sagna and Aleksandar Kolarov.
Bravo, Sagna, Otamendi, Stones, Kolarov, Fernandinho, De Bruyne, Silva, Sterling, Nolito, Iheanacho.
Today's team for the Manchester derby... #MUNMCI pic.twitter.com/JDJbfCAoN9
Who's in, who's out? Find out very shortly.
Claudio Reyna is sitting in a large leather armchair in the George Steinbrenner III suite at Yankee Stadium. It is one of the more unlikely places the journey of the City Football Group has taken him in recent years.
In 2012, when Ferran Soriano was recruited to be chief executive officer of Manchester City, he called the staff together. He told them that this was a club that would have to do things differently. They could try to be Manchester United, they could hire a great coach, buy great players, win trophies, but that was never going to get them ahead.
'I remember that meeting,' Soriano says. 'I used a sailing analogy. What I said was that we were behind – and we still are. The number of fans, the number of shirts we sell. We are the fastest growing club, but still behind.
For two hours this afternoon, this place will be at the centre of the sporting world pic.twitter.com/SwKO0AeDyq
On what charge you might ask? Well there must be some sort of law against having a half-half scarf at a fierce local derby... what do you mean there's isn't?
'All week I’ve taken others’ criticism of Wayne Rooney on board, listening to the constant chipping away at what he apparently cannot do and why he is no longer good enough. Each day I’ve felt my mouth open a little more in disbelief. Most of what has been said is nonsense.
'I want to make it clear here that I’m not going to paint a picture to suggest Rooney is in his pomp. He isn’t the dynamic force of nature he once was. It would be ridiculous to try to say he is and certain observations about him have been legitimate.
'Ridiculous, though, is the perfect word to describe some of the things that have been said about him since England’s 1-0 win in Slovakia. What exactly was so awful about his performance that has prompted this dissection?'
A #ManchesterDerby debut for @LeroySane19? We'll have team news from Old Trafford in around 30 minutes... #utdvcity pic.twitter.com/TEZ5Bgox3X
...and here is the Celtic team.
We will have our focus on the Manchester derby this afternoon but I'll keep you posted of major events in Scotland's biggest game.
📋 Celtic team to play Rangers. #COYBIG pic.twitter.com/e6Ofho6oFc
Don't forget it's the return of the Old Firm derby to the Scottish Premiership this afternoon. Here is the Rangers team ahead of the noon kick-off at Parkhead.
TEAM NEWS: Mark Warburton has made four changes from the Kilmarnock match... pic.twitter.com/nY6FRJF3A9
KIERAN GILL: Amid Mino Raiola's tour of tirades this week, the agent of Paul Pogba and Zlatan Ibrahimovic took aim at Pep Guardiola. Lacking balls and boring football were among his accusations.
There are a few things that Yaya Toure would like to get off his chest too, no doubt, after preparing for a game against Manchester United that he will probably not be involved in.
Yet using the 33-year-old to go up against Paul Pogba and Marouane Fellaini might not be a bad idea...
Must have been a late night for the experienced match official, who eventually realises the ball has to be within the goal frame to trigger a goal.
I jest of course, but let's hope Clattenburg is on his A game this afternoon - he will have to be to control this fixture.
Don't agree with Martin Keown's team? Then try Jamie Redknapp's, The former England midfielder also puts together a combined Manchester XI team and also explains how Paul Pogba can run this game... I guess that reveals one player in his team.
Lots of Manchester derby features to come at you in the next couple of hours, here's our first as Martin Keown gives us his combined Manchester starting XI.
But something has to give! Manchester United and Manchester City have won every game they have played this season but for at least one side that perfect record comes to an end today.
It's of course the Manchester derby so welcome to Sportsmail's live coverage of the Old Trafford clash between two of this season's title contenders.
Bitter rivals Jose Mourinho and Pep Guardiola will resume hostilities for the first time in the Premier League when United host City in this season's first Manchester derby.
Both sides have made 100 per cent starts to the league campaign with many regarding this afternoon's winner as title favourites. City will miss suspended striker Sergio Aguero while new keeper Claudio Bravo could make his debut tasked with keeping Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Co at bay.
Follow all the action from Old Trafford as it happens - as well as updates from the return of the Old Firm derby between Celtic and Rangers - with Sportsmail's LIVE coverage...