What time is the game?
The third north London derby of the season takes place today at White Hart Lane, and is quite possibly the biggest since these two clubs were jostling for a top-four finish at the end of the 2005-06 season, as both teams seek to maintain their push towards the title.
Kick-off is at 12.45pm.
What TV channel is showing it?
The match is on BT Sport 1.
What's the team news?
Nabil Bentaleb is unlikely to feature for Tottenham after he played 63 minutes for the under-21s against Reading on Thursday night.
Bentaleb, who was a regular starter under Pochettino last season but has started only twice in the league this term, requested to play for the youth team after being left out of the squad against West Ham in midweek.
Mousa Dembele has an outside chance of a return as he nears recovery from a groin strain and Dele Alli is expected to shake off an ankle problem. Clinton Njie and Jan Vertonghen are both out with knee injuries.
Tottenham (possible 4-2-3-1): Lloris; Walker, Alderweireld, Wimmer, Rose; Dier, Dembele; Son, Alli, Eriksen; Kane.
Dele Alli nurses his injury
Arsenal will be without Petr Cech and Laurent Koscielny.
Cech and Koscielny are both sidelined with calf injuries for the clash between the two title rivals at White Hart Lane, with goalkeeper Cech set to be missing for up to a month.
Arsene Wenger is hopeful defender Koscielny will be back in a week but he is still without definite absentees Jack Wilshere (leg), Tomas Rosicky (thigh), Santi Cazorla (knee) and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain (knee).
Arsenal (possible 4-2-3-1): Ospina; Bellerin, Mertesacker, Gabriel, Monreal; Ramsey, Coquelin; Campbell, Ozil, Sanchez; Welbeck.
Petr Cech is out of the north London derby
Alan Smith: What could decide the game
A regular feature of Tottenham’s play has been a long diagonal ball from Toby Alderweireld, who usually hits these passes with great accuracy. Executed properly, it’s a very useful way to quickly switch from defence to attack by turning the opposition’s rearguard around to face its own goal. Central to this ploy are Harry Kane and Dele Alli, both of whom have scored this season from such a move.
Alli, in particular, will always be on his toes when Alderweireld takes possession, knowing that the centre-half will look to hit the pass. If Kane comes towards the ball a few yards to show for a pass into feet, he might drag out his marker a little to create space behind. Running from deep, Alli tends to time his runs perfectly. Arsenal cannot allow themselves to fall for this straightforward tactic.
Space on Arsenal's left flank
One of the worst aspects of Arsenal’s defeat at Manchester United wasn’t so much the abject failure of Gabriel and Laurent Koscielny to deal with crosses, more the way United were allowed to sling in those balls to start with. It was on Arsenal’s left where the visitors lost shape, where Nacho Monreal was hung out to dry.
Nacho Monreal will need to work hard  Photo: REUTERS
The Spaniard must be hoping his team offers more protection today, given the way Tottenham’s Kyle Walker likes to surge forward from right-back. At Old Trafford, Alexis Sanchez got caught wandering inside to try and get involved, meaning that when United won the ball and quickly shifted it right, Monreal often found himself trying to handle two players.
Sanchez has a big role to play on the front foot, but he simply must keep and eye on the marauding Walker.
Joel Campbell got his first taste of this derby back in November when Arsenal came from behind to earn a 1-1 draw. Based on current form, he should certainly be granted a second bite here, seeing as he was Arsenal’s best player against Swansea before Arsene Wenger unfathomably took him off.
Joel Campbell scored Arsenal's goal against Swansea  Photo: GETTY IMAGES
I have been hugely impressed by this lad at times, a player whose career at the Emirates seemed to be heading nowhere when he was loaned out to a succession of clubs. Yet the Costa Rican has largely done well when given the chance. On Wednesday, he actually showed the way forward to his misfiring teammates by keeping his head to slot home the opener.
For that moment alone, I think he should start at White Hart Lane. Playing on the right, he can give Danny Rose problems with his movement and passing.
Tottenham have certainly put in the hard yards this season. They have covered, on average, 5km more a game than their local rivals and Mauricio Pochettino’s high-intensity pressing game has Tottenham on course to record their highest ever Premier League finish.
But can it continue? A look at how the Argentine’s teams have fared towards the end of previous seasons provides a little warning sign for Tottenham fans daring to dream of the title.
In three of the last four years, Pochettino‘s sides have displayed a worrying tendency to fade. In 2010-11, his Espanyol side won half of their league matches up to March before their form collapsed. They won just 18.2% of their final 11 games and suffered a similar slump the following season, when they won just 3 of their 14 matches between March and May.
Tottenham are made to work hard by Mauricio Pochettino
At Southampton he maintained a win percentage of 45% throughout the 2013/14 season.
But in Pochettino’s first season at Spurs, five defeats in their final 13 games of last season saw their win percentage drop 12.3% to 46.2% as they finished six points of fourth-placed Manchester United.
They have won 53.5% of their league matches so far this season. Can Pochettino find a way to make it last?
Spurs have lost just one of their last home matches against Arsenal, who will be without Petr Cech, Laurent Koscielny and any confidence. Both teams desperately need to bounce back but there is more belief at Spurs. Arsenal certainly cannot be ruled out, and are a wounded animal right now, but it points to another home win in this fixture. 2-1.