Wayne Rooney scored a last minute penalty for Manchester United as they squeezed past Sheffield United to reach the FA Cup fourth round.
Substitute Memphis Depay broke into the box and was fouled by Sheffield United's Dean Hammond in the dying minutes of the game and Rooney broke the League One's side hearts.
United fans were less than impressed throughout and ironically cheered their side during parts of the second half.
But the Manchester United fans are not fooled. They give their side the thumbs down as they trudge off down the tunnel, before then applauding the dejected and beaten Sheffield United players.
Make no mistake, Manchester United's penalty was correctly awarded but Sheffield United were excellent value for a replay at Bramall Lane.
They haven't got it though and instead it will be Manchester United's name in the hat for the fourth round.
That's all from me here folks. You can catch the fall-out on the homepage but check back tomorrow for more live FA Cup coverage. Cheerio.
That's an almighty wriggle by Manchester United after a dreadful performance.
Wayne Rooney scored his 239th goal for Man Utd in all competition. He is now 10 short of the club record held by Bobby Charlton (249). #MUFC
"Late, late winner!" @WayneRooney nets a 94th minute penalty, his 9th goal in his last 10 #EmiratesFACup games. https://t.co/PHAWTLd23m
90+6min: Sheffield United are piling forward now, but they look to have blown the chance as Basham concedes a free-kick with a crunching challenge on Memphis. No yellow cards - and there hasn't been any all game.
9 - Wayne Rooney has scored nine goals in his last ten FA Cup games for Manchester United. Relief.
90+3min: Nerves of steel, Wayne Rooney slots from home the penalty spot, sending Long the wrong way. The Red Devils have got out of jail here big time. Louis van Gaal barely reacts on the bench.
90+2min: Wow, just wow. Memphis Depay has won a penalty in stoppage time after being caught by a studs up Dean Hammond challenge inside the box. Depay went down rather theatrically but a spot-kick is the correct call.
90+1min: There will be SIX minutes of added time and maybe even more as Conor Sammon has gone down injured, making 11th hour changes to a Sheffield United substitution plan. The striker eventually departs in favour of Matt Done.
90min: In theory there is a tense finale coming up, but you try telling Manchester United fans that.
They are already heading for the exits at Old Trafford as Memphis Depay again goes close with an effort that zips just wide. More ironic cheers and applause from the home fans.
87min: The question is can Sheffield United hang on to a draw at Old Trafford> They have gone into an ultra defensive shell inviting pressure.
Wait! They nearly concede! John Brayford blocks an Anthony Martial effort from inside the box with his face before Chris Smalling clumsily turns the rebound wide.
84min: Applause greets Schweinsteiger as he now jogs back onto the field of play. He's not running too freely but given his recovery in the last few minutes, I think he will run it off.
82min: Big problems now for Manchester United. Having used all their subs, Bastian Schweinsteiger has injured his leg in a 50-50 challenge with Basham - with the energy involved in the legs colliding resulting in the midfielder going down in agony. Uncertain if he will continue at this stage,
81min: Rain is falling again but it isn't dampening the mood of the Sheffield United fans. They have been going almost non-stop since kick-off in support of their side.
It's all too much for former Manchester United midfielder Paul Scholes...
Scholesy's reaction to the latest failed #ManUtd attack... pic.twitter.com/PhvM3BgSjg
78min: Cheers from the home fans as Fellaini is hooked off and replaced by Andreas Pereira in Manchester United's last substitution.
Louis Reed replaces Jay McEveley for Sheffield United.
75min: Poor, poor, poor. The ball rolls across the path of Bastian Schweinsteiger 25 yards out, who then slices terribly wide of the target with his 'shot'.
Andreas Pereira is warming up for the hosts as Sheffield United chant 'you're getting sacked in the morning' to Louis van Gaal.
72min: The double substitution has improved United but only on a scale that they have shifted from neutral gear into first. Sheffield United though are starting to carry a few heavy legs out there. Can the hosts capitalise.
69min: More ironic cheers and applause from the home fans as Matteo Darmian has Manchester United's first shot on target with just 21 minutes to play.
Like Basham's effort is is low, weak and straight at Long.
67min: SHOT ON TARGET! WE HAVE A SHOT ON TARGET! It's come from Sheffield United and even then it's no real threat with a weak low effort from Chris Basham easily gobbled up by De Gea.
At the other end, Memphis Depay fires just wide after cutting inside from the left - leading to the United fans ironically cheering and applauding. Brutal.
64min: On comes Ryan Flynn for Sheffield United as Billy Sharp departs. We still haven't had a shot on target...
62min: It's all going well for Sheffield United but even Nigel Adkins is looking at fresh legs,. Ryan Flynn is getting his instructions on the touchline.
'Lingard and Depay coming on, United need some spark. But the withdrawal of Herrera and Mata not being met enthusiastically by the home fans who probably wanted one of Schweinsteiger or Fellaini to go. Herrera's name is chanted.'
60min: Changes are on the way for Manchester United and not before time. Ander Herrera and Juan Mata are replaced, with Memphis Depay and Jesse Lingard coming on.
57min: I'm starting to think our most likely source for a goal might actually come from Sheffield United on the counter attack.
Nigel Adkins is on the touchline encouraging his side who are just starting to spot a few gaps in the Red Devils backline in their hopeful through balls.
'Manchester United do seem to be trying to shift the ball a little quicker in this second half after a 45-minute snoozefest, but the final ball is still so poor it hasn't had any effect.'
51min: Deary me. I'll let The Simpsons sum up the start of this second half (and this game in general.)
48min: No early hope of this game catching light. None at all. It's the same pattern as the first half with Manchester United having all the ball inside the Blades half and nothing more.
So I'll see you back in 45 minutes to give you a confirmation of the 0-0 result... I suppose I better not chance it. I'll stay and suffer.
That's right folks. We haven't had ONE shot on target yet. A new low even by Old Trafford's shot-shy standards in recent times.
It's an embarrassing reflection on the game that the closest we have come to a goal is a 30-yard Wayne Rooney shot which was nowhere near the target.
The striker though has still seen precious little of the ball, with his attacking highlights consisting of two clever runs into the box which failed to result in a shot. I never said it was a classic...
Here is the England captain's first half heat map.
People at Old Trafford have now seen only 1 goal in the last 10 first halves (450 minutes), that goal was scored by Norwich's Cameron Jerome
But that's about as much positive spin I can put on that for Manchester United supporters.
The truth is Sheffield United have come to defend, done it very well and in doing so have frustrated the home team and (even more so) their fans.
There were boos at the break from the Manchester United supporters having seen their team look so clueless in attack. Nigel Adkins will be delighted with how his Blades side have stifled the favourites.
10 - Manchester United have now gone 10 first halves at Old Trafford without scoring, in all competitions. Reserved.
'All very ponderous from a home point of view here. They may very well end up winning this game, but the enjoyment has been sucked out of Old Trafford. The reintroduction of the rondo exercise in training hasn't upped the ante in an attacking sense.'
45+1min: There are three added minutes at Old Trafford. I make that another 180 seconds of aimless short Manchester United passing in my book.
45min: No, they are not. Wayne Rooney fires straight into the wall as this first half drifts towards a goalless, soulless end.
44min: Maybe set-pieces are the breakthrough option for Manchester United? Sheffield United's Chris Basham is penalised for a handball 25 yards out central to goal.
42min: 'Jose Mourinho' chant the Sheffield United fans, perhaps sensing the pressure is back on Louis van Gaal in the Red Devils dugout, while the home fans continue to groan at their side's awful lack of ideas to break down the Blades.
A break in play as Paul Coutts receives some treatment on the Old Trafford pitch.
39min: Deary me. Play literally comes to a standstill on the edge of the Sheffield United box as the Manchester United attackers run out of ideas. The ball is then played to the feet of Rooney, who is tackled instantly before the Blades clear again. Rinse and repeat.
36min: Slightly more dangerous as Rooney runs on to a pass inside the box but he is beaten by a yard to the ball by Long who gathers.
Ten minutes before the break and we have yet to see a shot on target.
33min: More groans from the locals Manchester United fans. Marouane Fellaini picks up the ball on the right but he loses the ball before even getting a cross in as Sheffield United once again clear effortlessly.
Outside a Wayne Rooney shot from 30 yards (which flew miles over the bar) the hosts haven't had a worthwhile chance.
30min: ...as you were. Don't get me wrong, Sheffield United will be delighted with this, but Manchester United's lack of penetration is leaving much to be desired from the home side.
Dare I say it, this has 0-0 stamped all over it. Improvements please.
27min: Better from Manchester United, who at least now have intent in their attacks as Matteo Darmian swings in a delightful cross from the right, but it's headed clear by the Blades defence.
24min: Groans at Old Trafford, and that's because Manchester United attack with real purpose on the counter before it quickly grinds to a halt on the left flank.
It enables Sheffield United to get bodies back and the home fans already know that means more passage of play played in front of the Blades defence - which has been the majority of the match.
21min: Half-chance for Manchester United. Wayne Rooney races on to a pass inside the box, beating Long, before running out of room and angle as the United attack quickly passes without danger.
'Nigel Adkins very pleased with goalkeeper George Long quickly launching long just then. The visitors keen on catching United on the hop.'
18min: Catching practice for David de Gea - not that conditions make it a straight forward one - as the Manchester United keeper collects a high cross from Martyn Woolford.
Moments later Conor Sammon is penalised for handball before forcing De Gea to tip over a rising drive.
15min: I've seen this before at Old Trafford. In fact I've seen it many times this season. Manchester United have had the lion's share of the ball - 74 per cent of it - but they are creating so very little. Sheffield United looking comfortable playing in a defensive shape.
'Attendances are often lower at FA Cup ties, but atmospheres are way better than the run-of-the-mill league fixtures.
'Old Trafford is noisier this evening than it's been for months with home fans responding to the six thousand travelling from south Yorkshire
'Not too much to shout about on the pitch, conditions slippy and unhelpful.'
9min: This is a little better from Manchester United, Juan Mata floating a ball towards the far post that Anthony Martial just misses out on making contact with.
'Like this from Sheffield United - two genuine wide man in a 4-4-2, up and at 'em in midfield. Big game for Chris Basham in the middle for Nigel Adkins' Blades tonight.'
From Sportsmail's Joe Bernstein at Old Trafford:
'Manchester United have failed to score against MK Dons, Cambridge United and Middlesbrough since Louis van Gaal arrived so perhaps it's not surprising that the opening minutes have been dominated by League One Sheffield United, in torrential rain.'
3min: I hope Manchester United's players are more up for it than their fans are. There are plenty of empty seats around Old Trafford and it's still the small pocket of Blade supporters making the majority of the nose. An even start on the pitch. No chances yet.
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more.
Rain continues to fall and it remains the Sheffield United supporters doing all the chanting.
5 - Sheffield United have won five of their last six FA Cup ties (L1) against teams from a higher division. Underdog.
'We're United! We're United!' coming from, you guessed it, the away end...'
Louis van Gaal speaks to @btsportfootball ahead of kick-off... #mufc https://t.co/1cEapx4dSn
And the benefit for the players is that they can at least stay dry for a few minutes. The rain is absolutely falling down at Old Trafford. 'Perfect for tackling' claims Paul Scholes.
'Only three changes for Louis van Gaal this evening, and that's hardly unexpected. How important this competition has now become for United.
'The manager wrote as much in his programme notes, referencing that it's far too long - 12 years - since they lifted the FA Cup.'
3rd round of the FA Cup. Let's do this! 👏 #mufc pic.twitter.com/y4b6w6PX4A
Sheffield United are confident of making Manchester United's 'sticky season' even worse, with captain Jay McEveley saying all the pressure is on their FA Cup third-round opponents.
Louis van Gaal's side have struggled this campaign, with the pressure ratcheting up several notches after they ended 2015 without a win in eight matches - their worst run since 1989-90.
The Blades reached the Capital One Cup semi-finals last season and the final-four juncture of the FA Cup the year before that, so captain McEveley knows better than most the key to causing an upset.
'I think it was about going in relaxed - no pressure on you at all,' the defender said of their recent cup successes.
'We're a League One club and all the pressure is on them on Saturday.
Louis van Gaal is prepared to dip into the January transfer market if he identifies a player who will improve his Manchester United squad.
The Dutchman, writing in his programme notes ahead of Saturday's FA Cup third round tie against Sheffield United, concedes January is not the best time to buy, but he is not ruling out bringing in new faces this month either.
'January brings the opening of the transfer window and, as I have already seen, we have been linked to a host of players,' the United manager wrote.
'I don't see January as the ideal time to do business as the players cannot then have the pre-season that I feel they need to be integrated into the squad, both on and off the pitch.
'However, if I and the coaches feel that something can be done to improve the current squad then that is something we will look at if the opportunity does arise.'
Starting XI: Long, Brayford, Basham, Coutts, Sharp, Collins, Woolford, Sammon, McEveley, Edgar, Hammond
Subs: Howard, Flynn, Baxter, Done, Campbell-Ryce, Reed, Adams
Starting XI: De Gea, Darmian, Smalling, Blind, Borthwick-Jackson, Schweinsteiger, Fellaini, Herrera, Mata, Martial, Rooney
Subs: Romero, McNair, Varela, Lingard, Pereira, Memphis, Keane
...and welcome to Sportsmail's live coverage of Manchester United's third round FA Cup clash with Sheffield United.
Team news coming up in just a minute...
Follow Sportsmail's coverage of the FA Cup as Manchester United host Sheffield United at Old Trafford to conclude Saturday's third round action.
Having not won the world's oldest cup competition since 2004, the Red Devils have endured their longest drought without lifting the FA Cup since 1977.
Having also not won a major honour since 2013, Louis van Gaal's team are also on the hunt to start winning silverware again as they host a Blades team who produced cup upsets in recent seasons.