(Rochester, NY) – The Rochester Lancers will return home this weekend when they take on the Detroit Waza Flo at the Blue Cross Arena at the War Memorial.  Kick off for the match is scheduled for 1:00 p.m. on Saturday, January 10.  Prior to taking on Detroit however the Lancers will travel down the New York State Thruway for a matchup with the Syracuse Silver Knights on Friday beginning at 7:30 p.m. at the OnCenter.
The Lancers surrendered just 12 points in a pair of losses over the weekend, including a one-point loss to Chicago in overtime, and will look to regain their early season momentum against a team they have become familiar with.  The Lancers and Waza Flo have faced each other twice already this season with the Lancers capturing both contests.    Rochester knocked off Detroit 9-8 in overtime on the opening night of the season again by a 16-5 final at home two weeks later.  Detroit has struggled this season, winning just once on the road this season and losing their last four.
The first 1,000 fans in attendance will receive a free Lancers decal courtesy of the Ide Family of Dealerships.
Friday’s match will pit the Lancers against Syracuse for the third time in three weeks.  The two clubs have split the season series thus far with both played in Rochester.  Syracuse has won their last two matches of the season and along with Rochester, trail first place Baltimore by five games in the Eastern Division standings.
Rochester enters the match tied for second place in the MASL’s Eastern Division at 4-5 with Syracuse.  Detroit rests in fourth place, with a 3-8 record and two games behind the Lancers for the division’s third and final playoff spot.
Saturday’s game as well as all games during the 2014-15 season can be viewed online at http://golivesportscast.com/your-masl-teams/.  This marks the first year of a multi-year partnership with GoLive Sports and the MASL.  All games are also live on 93.3 Fickle FM with Joe Giuliano calling the play-by-play for the fourth year in a row.
Individual game tickets are now on sale for $10 and $15 for all fans over the age of two.  For individual tickets, season tickets, or group sales, call the Lancers office at (585) 872-5425.  Season tickets and voucher packs are currently on sale.  Season tickets can be purchased for $150 in any seat location.  Voucher packs start at just $60 and include free food.  For the Lancers full season schedule, visit www.rlancers.com.