Arsenal supporters had been calling for Walcott’s arrival and his introduction for Hector Bellerin brought that equaliser of huge significance.
United’s hopes of qualifying automatically for the group stage of the Champions League now hang by a thread after this. Arsenal lie two points and seven goals ahead of fourth-placed United and can confirm third against Sunderland at the Emirates on Wednesday. Only a last-day loss by Manchester City could give Arsenal any hope of second.
"From the way LVG said that, it sounds like De Gea is on his way. If I was a United fan I would be upset," says Henry.
LVG: "David De Gea will not leave us easily because we have a great club. But he is Spanish and his girlfriend is Spanish. And he may have a chance to go to another great club." Hmm, taht sounds like a DDG to Madrid line, to me. LVG refuses to be drawn on Falcao, mind you.
Van Gaal: "We have reached our goal for the season and from what I can see from these fans, they are very happy. But as a manager I want more."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Manchester United - "We should have taken all three points," Young tells &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23MUTV" target="_blank"&gt;#MUTV&lt;/a&gt;. "We were disappointed to let them back in the game but we played well."&lt;/noframe&gt;
A pretty fair summing-up, I would say. United were much the better team in the first half and might well have put the game to bed.
And here is Louis Van Gaal.
"It was the third goal in a row that was deflected and falls in our net, so you can say it is unlucky. But I say to my players that you have to force luck. We were much the better side for 60 minutes. I have said before that Arsenal have the best team but Chelsea can finish the game. And like us. We are 1-0 ahead and we need to finish the game."
Here's that excellent student of the game Mr Mark Ogden, who has learnt five things from Manchester United versus Arsenal. Number one concerns the future of Theo Walcott, who used the word "patient" rather passive-aggresively in his post-match interview, IMHO. "Patient" as in waiting to get game time.
Arsenal need to tie Walcott down to a new deal There is no shortage of exciting wingers in the Premier League right now and Theo Walcott remains one of the most effective, even after a lengthy cruciate ligament lay-off.
But with his contract entering its final year at the Emirates, Arsenal must prioritise keeping the England international, who earned his team a point with a late equaliser at Old Trafford.
Walcott is more rounded than Raheem Sterling, quicker than Ashley Young and Aaron Lennon and more consistent than Andros Townsend.
Any failure to secure Walcott to a new deal would be reckless on Arsenal’s part.
One man who had a solid game was Danny Blind. He very nearly scored with a slick training ground set piece, as well. This graphic from Virgin Media shows how strong he was in the air, and dominant in the tackle too. He certainly kept Arsenal's flair players quiet.
Here's Wayne Rooney on the pitch with his child.
Have we had enough of children on football pitches yet? Or am I heartless and out of touch?
Here's my piece on Sky's coverage of Steven Gerrard's farewell.
Stick around for the reaction. De Gea and Falcao walking together as they do the lap of honour. Taking their last looks?
Louis Van Gaal on the pitch. Shouting. Literally shouting at the crowd "THANKS FROM MY PLAYERS AND MY STAFF. BYE."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Manchester United - There will now be a customary lap of honour from the &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23mufc" target="_blank"&gt;#mufc&lt;/a&gt; players to mark the final home game of 2014/15.&lt;/noframe&gt;
I would suggest that "muted but polite applause" would be the order of the day.
Manchester United 1 Arsenal 1
Just time for a quick booking - Herrera. And that's the lot
All hands to the pump in the Arsenal area though as Valencia and Young cause problems, and PEr Mert has to show his authority with a clearing header.
Valencia down the right, loses it though and United might get caught out here in the Arsenal stylee - they have overcommitted... but Ramsey cannot really do a lot as he breaks.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Michael Cox - Imagine a Man Utd v Arsenal game with 0 bookings a decade ago...&lt;/noframe&gt;
A bumper five minutes of added time. Sir Alex? Is that you?
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Michael Cox - Imagine a Man Utd v Arsenal game with 0 bookings a decade ago...&lt;/noframe&gt;
Sanchez showing a lot of heart, still charging around like his life depends on it. Appears to be asking some of his colleagues for similar levels of commitment. Still, here he is being subbed off. Mat Flam the man who replaces him.
But here come United! Ball into the area, nice cushioned header from Big Marouane F, and here's RVP meeting the ball with a clean hit. Alas for him, over the bar.
Not too sure why Arsenal suddenly on top, but they are,
And now here's Ramsey with a great ball forward, Giroud takes it in his side and is just squeezed out.
Arsenal are piling it on now. Giroud fires into the side netting.
GOAL! Valdes has had his first touch of the ball as a United player... and it's to pick the ball out of the back of the net. Long diagonal ball from Arsenal finds Walcott free down the right. Wonderful first touch, and he hits a shot at goal. Deflected off the boot of Tyler Blackett, wrong-foots Valdes and Arsenal have an equaliser. Man United 1 Arsenal 1 (Blackett OG 82)
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Michiel Jongsma - Manchester United and Chelsea combined own four of the best eight goalkeepers in the world, don't they.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Young terrorising the Arsenal defence, goes past World Class Wilshere and Bellerin with ease, Koscielny has to slide in to concede a corner.
Ickle Theowaltrousers's first act is to get caught offside.
United use this opportunity to make a double switch of their own. Marcus Rojo comes off for Tyler Blackett and Victor Valdes comes on to make his Manchester United debut!
Wenger is making a double change as he bids to get back in this. It's Theo Walcott and Jack Wilshere to come on. De Gea, by the way, seems to have done himself some sort of injury. Bellerin and Cazorla are the men to make way. Cazorla can barely muster the energy to get off the pitch. He has looked knackered throughout.
Rojo to the rescue! Diagonal ball, Ramsey is onto it... he lifts the ball over De Gea and is about to apply the coup de grace when Rojo busts a gut to get there and hooks it clear! A vital interception.
Here's an email from Kiran Kulkarni:
Can Alex Ferguson take charge of the transfer business during the window ? I am not convinced of Woodward's credentials as astute negotiator..
This bloke Falcao looks way inferior to Ings, Vardy or even Rudy Gestede.. I don't even want to mention the £59m guy..
Gunners would have been offering Guard of honor today, if Woodward had gone on a long vacation last summer..
Does Fergie fancy a short transfer window comeback to knock Jose & Chelsea off their ******* perch?
Rojo looks lively to snuff out a fine Ramsez-Sanchez link-up. Ramsez?! I mean Ramsey. Not some hideous hybrid. A quick word from Roddy Forsyth up at Ibrox:
With his goalkeeper beaten, Vuckic heads off the line from Queens goalscorer Lyle as Rangers defend frantically. Stuart McCall responds by taking off a striker, Nicky Clark, for defender Bilel "Bomb Scare" Mohnsi, to mixed feelings amongst the home support. This is a test of nerve now. Mohsni booked for injury time crazy foul on the edge of the box but Ian McShane hit the wall - and Rangers are through to meet Hibs at Ibrox on Wednesday night.
Ozil down the left, he's clear, he dribbles a weak centre across. Rojo looks like he has got this covered but somehow Giroud gets in front of him, not sure whether that is a defensive howler or muscular forward play or a bit of both, but anyway Giroud has got a shot in from a position where he had no right to. It's weak though and behind for a corner, which is cleared.
Falcao, mostly harmless, comes off. Gets quite a good ovation, a sense of the valedictory about it, to my mind. The equally disappointing RVP comes on.
Ramsey bombs down the right... but whither the support?
Arsenal have raised their level, but without any attendant increase in chance-creation.
Herrera and, of all people, Rojo put together a move that ends with the Argentine thumping a pretty decent shot, straight at the keeper though.
Arsenal have a corner, but it is headed away nicely by Jones. On his hind legs, this time. Played back in though, and here's Sanchez with a shot.... a terrible, terrible shot.
United back into their stride right away, Valencia's down the right and he crosses the ball for Fellaini, who is denied by sheer weight of numbers in the Arsenal backline.
Hearing that Sanchez might not be feeling 100%. Certainly not playing at 100%. But he has emerged after half time.
Juan Mata had a heck of a half, didn't he? He was at the heart of most of United's best work, and his passing accuracy was a treat to behold.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Daniel Storey - Alexis Sanchez has been abysmal, looks knackered. Completed six passes in the first half, same number of touches as David Ospina.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Man United 1 Arsenal 0 (Herrera 30) United deservedly in the lead. Arsenal have done little apart from hump it forward to Giroud to run onto a couple of times. Odd. They have a problem at left back, where Monreal was posted missing for the goal. Quiet game so far in truth that will be most remembered for Phil Jones's awesome prone header while flat on the turf.
Here's Roddy Forsyth up in Scotland. "And after a hectic spell in which Gavin Kelly broke clear through the Rangers defence, only to have the ball bobble off his boot in front of goal, Stuart McCall's side go back in front on a 3-2 aggregate as Lee Wallace shoots home from a lay-off by Newcastle loan player, Haris Vickic. Remember, away goals don't count double in these playoffs."
Wrestling match between Coquellin and Fellaini sees the ref award it to Marouane on points. United have a handy freekick. Neat move finds Blind unmarked at the edge of the box, he hits a crisp first timer but it hits Smalling on the bum! I think that probably would have gone in - certainly Ospina would not have got across in time.
Giant fly on the camera, as well. Anyway. Back to the matter at hand. Chris Smalling directing operations and United launch an attack
CONFERENCE PLAY-OFF FINAL UPDATE! Bristol Rovers have followed the Louis Van Gaal method at Wembley and are bringing on a sub keeper for their penalty shootout against Grimsby. Steve Mildenhall, this is your moment!
Mata with a storming run, does really well to get a cross over, Falcao arrives and bundles a header at goal, did well to get there but was never going to be able to get much power onto his effort.
Young good again with a cross, but cannot find Mata. Herera has a shot wide from outside the area.
Fellaini, by the way, made a good run in the lead-up to the goal, also twoards the back post, overloading that area and opening up the space for Herrera to shoot.
Arsenal try to hit back via Ozil - hi Mesut! hadn't seen you there in the first 32 minutes - as he plays a clever reverse ball through the Untied defence. Too clever for Ollie Giroud, though - he fails to read the pass...
GOAL! Not been a lot in it so far but United have probably deserved this. Young strong run down the left, he's definitely had the better of Bellerin down the flank. He slings a cross over and there's Ander Herrera, unmarked at the back post. That's become a MAJOR issue for Arsenal in recent weeks. Where the heck is Monreal?! Herrera may be unmarked, but it still needs a really first-rate finish from the Basque, a lovely first-time volley and that is a neatly taken opener. Man United 1 Arsenal 0 (Herrera 30)
Another big moment for Jones as Arsenal again play it forward. Jones and De Gea seem to be out of sync and there's panic in the ranks before DDG plays it clear. Jones very nearly slotted the ball past his own keeper.
That was easily the most memorable moment of the match so far, and quite possibly the most memorable moment of the season.
Utterly sensational play from Phil Jones. Arsenal play a very un-Arsenal hoof forward from centre half, Giroud runs onto it. He has got Jones to contend with. But Jones slips over! He stumbles. half recovers, falls and now makes a heroic back header while lying on the ground. Properly funny.
Falcao fell over. This man done a joke.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Forza Juve - Not Falcao more like Slipcao&lt;/noframe&gt;
This is more like it from Arsenal, though. Bellerin and Ramsey linking up well down the right, playing it into Giroud who does some decent hold-up play. United have bodies back, though, and the move peters out.
Ashley Young, who has suddenly become good at football again in the last couple of months, is having a strong game. Constant threat.
United have had something like 66% of possession.
This is a fine run from Mata that is ended in argicultural fashion by Coquelin, who has scythed him down on the edge of the box. Mata himself whips a freekick around the wall and it bounces potentially alarmingly a yard in front of Ospina, but there wasn't quite enough velocity on it to really trouble the Arsenal keeper.
Fellaini has the ball in the Arsenal area with his back to goal. Goes down looking for the pen under some gentle contact from Big Per M.
On an unrelated note, here's Roddy Forsyth up at Ibrox:
Stunner at Ibrox ! Crowd silenced by Derek Lyle, who saw Danny Carmichael breaking wide and was in position for the perfect return cross to head past Cammny Bell. Now it's 2-2 on aggregate and anybody's tie.
Said corner drops nicely to SMalling, unmarked at the back of the area but his shot is not so much with the accuracy. That was a really good chance. Deflected for a corner, which is cleared much more effectively.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Daniel Storey - Van Gaal on Smalling: "He is more of a leader of the defence than any other player."Too much to consider that a slight on Phil Jones?&lt;/noframe&gt;
Little moment of magic from Mata as he unpicks the Arsenal defence with a clever ball. Falcao is onto it, but is denied by a desperate intervention from Koscielny. Corner.
Young cuts in from the left and has an unimpressive shot over. The better option would have been the ball to the back post, where Fellaini had pulled away from his marker. Ashley acknowledges such to his colleague.
Jones slips, and Arsenal counter quickly but Smalling snuffs out the danger with an assured back-header. Good positioning from the centre half and skipper.
Tidy, assured start from both sides, but neither team able to mount an attack worthy of the name just yet. Here's Mata, though. That move breaks down and Sanchez gets a chance to run at the United defence, well supervised by Valencia and danger is averted.
United kick off but it's Arsenal who are having most of the early ball, albeit in unthreatening areas.
It'll be Man United to kick us off.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Rob Brown - Two hours until one of LVG and Wenger is a tactical genius who can win the league, while the other is a useless old man who needs to retire.&lt;/noframe&gt;
And here are the Arsenal.
Here is how the United team will line up.... Will it be De Gea's last game at OT?
Woop! Mike Dean in the house. And some footballers.
If Arsenal do manage to shut Man United out today, that could be a nail in the coffin of Falcao's Old Traffrod career, I fancy.
Talking of Rangers, adds, Roddy: "Rangers were the only visiting team to keep a clean sheet at Old Trafford that season! Can Arsenal emulate that today?"
There's a big game up in Scotland today and Roddy Forsyth is up there at Ibrox.
Tremendous buzz around Ibrox - stadium car park full for the first time this season. Surprise is that Stuart McCall has swicthed from the 3-5-2 which served him well in the first leg to a 4-4-2.
Yesterday's results mean that we now also know that Motherwell will be uin the playoffs. One possibility is that McCall could face the side he left in the autumn - but Rangers would have to get past Queens today and then Hibs home and away. This could bounce any way.
And there's a full house at Ibrox for the first time this season. Curious to remember that it is less than five years since it took a late Wayne Rooney penalty kick here to put Manchester United into the last 16 of the Champions League...
RVP has been ill, apparently, says Thierry Henry, with a suggestion that we might not be getting the full story.
Van Gaal: "It is important to win today because my family is here."
Louis VG explains why he has selected Chris Smalling as skipper today. "I have watched him, I have observed him. My principles are a total human being principle. It is not just about how you pass from A to B it is about how you deal with other people and are you a leader."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Samuel Luckhurst - Carrick: 'I was probably playing as well as I've ever played (before injury). Van Gaal has been terrific for me.' &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23mufc" target="_blank"&gt;#mufc&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
Here's an email from Damian Durrant. Wotcher Damian:
Alan, am I mistaken or despite not having the excuse of no money and having spent a fortune, Wenger is as usual playing for 4th? An FA cup final notwithstanding, doesn't Emperor Arsene have some rather see through clothes?
Epic levels of banter here.
How have you rated Ander Herrera over recent months? This graphic from Virgin Media suggests that he has got a long way to go before he matches a man who has been an absolute don in a rival's midfield during 2015. Santi Cazorla may have only scored three, same as Ander, but look at the discrepancy in assists and chances created. United fans: do you reckon you've had £29 million's worth?
United host Arsenal at 4pm at Old Trafford, live on Sky Sports 1/HD.
United win 7/5; Arsenal win 2/1; draw 12/5