Health & Dental Insurance The City of Allen offers a choice of two PPO Medical Plan options for full-time employees. Vision insurance is included through enrollment in either of these plans. Employees also have the option of participating in an indemnity Dental Plan. Coverage is available to all full-time employees and their dependents under these plans at group rates. Employee insurance coverage goes into effect the first day of the month following 30 days of employment.
Insurance CoverageBasic Group Life Insurance and Accidental Death and Dismemberment protection is provided to eligible full-time employees in the amount of one time the annual salary up to a maximum of $250,000 for each benefit.
Long-Term Disability Insurance is provided at no cost to full-time employees.
The City of Allen also offers optional programs that include Short-Term Disability, Voluntary Supplemental Life, Dependent Life and Voluntary AD&D insurance group rates.
Flexible Spending AccountsParticipation in Flexible Spending Accounts through payroll deduction for Health Care and Dependent Care expenses is also available for full time employees.
Wellness ProgramThe City of Allen administers a wellness program for full-time employees which provides premium reimbursement for participation in various wellness programs throughout the year.
Workers CompensationAll employees are covered by workers compensation for injuries sustained in the line of duty.
Holidays Employees receive nine paid holidays per year, including one personal day.
VacationEmployees with less than five years of service are eligible to earn 80 hours per year. An employee with five or more years of service is eligible to earn 120 hours per year. Employees with ten or more years of service are eligible for 160 hours per year.
Sick LeaveEmployees earn 72 hours of sick leave per year. There is no limit to the amount of sick leave hours accrued.
Retirement The City of Allen participates in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS): All full-time employees must participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System. TMRS is a qualified tax deferred retirement plan under Section 401 of the IRS. Seven (7%) percent of gross earnings are deducted each payroll as a pre-tax deduction and deposited into the member account. When an employee becomes vested and retires, the City provides 2-to-1 matching contributions. The City of Allen also participates in Social Security.
Deferred Compensation The City of Allen offers an optional deferred compensation 457 plan in which employees can contribute a portion of their salary, before taxes, to a retirement account.
LongevityEmployees who have been with the City of Allen at least a year receive $4 per month for every month worked.