It's the most beautiful sport of all, and the cruellest," Tom Watson says as his seamed old face crinkles a little more at the memory of how he almost won last year's Open Championship. He even manages to laugh as he remembers being just a few months from his 60th birthday, and walking with the aid of an artificial hip, as he reached the final green at Turnberry. He had two putts to win his sixth Open and complete a story as evocative as it was incredible.
Watson had just hit the sweetest eight-iron of the week, and he was on the brink of becoming the oldest winner at the highest level of sport. Yet, needing only to par that hole to seal his ninth major, and his first in 26 years, he discovered instead the essential truth of golf. "I wrote that line to a lot of people who sent me the nicest notes afterwards. I said, 'This is what golf is – with all its beauty and cruelty captured in a single shot.'
"I hit it perfectly, but I felt a strong breeze just after impact. I asked Andy North, who was following me for ABC [American Broadcasting Company], 'Where did it land?' He said, 'About a foot into the green' and I replied, 'That's exactly where I was aiming.' Andy said, 'Yeah, Watson, but that ball got taken by a gust of wind.'"
Watson shakes his head with amused indignation at the thought of his wind-swept ball ending up in a collar of rough on the edge of the green. "I had this confirmed by a photographer. He said, 'I was at the back of the green when the ball landed and started rolling. I had you in my lens and a gust of wind literally jerked the camera up.' That could have been the moment that cost me."
His first putt slid past, leaving an eight-footer for the championship. Watson needed to summon a touch more of the same calm that had defined his week. But his putter twitched nervously and sent him into a play-off and defeat against the unheralded Stewart Cink.
He grimaces when asked if he has watched that putt on tape. "Briefly. It's not a putt you want to study." How did he cope with the disappointment which, then, he said, "tears at my guts"?
The great old golfer, who returns to St Andrews this week for the 2010 Open, offers another telling anecdote. "Jack [Nicklaus] called me right after the tournament, and his words were very poignant. He said, 'You know, Tom, I've never watched a golf tournament from start to finish on TV – but I watched you today.' He ran me through the 18th hole and said, 'You hit the perfect tee shot and the perfect second shot – which was literally four inches from stopping.' He said, 'You played the proper third shot with the putter. It gave you an opportunity to win the championship with your next shot. And then you hit a putt like the rest of us these days.'"
Watson smiles helplessly, looking fleetingly like the freckle-faced kid from Kansas whose easy-going nature masked his resolve when, almost 40 years ago, he opted not to follow his father into the insurance business but set about becoming the world's best golfer. "Jack broke up the disappointment with comedy. That soothed the pain to a certain degree."
When did Watson finally reconcile himself to the loss? "The next afternoon. I came here, to Sunningdale [where Watson sits in a genteel office], to play The Senior Open. I hadn't slept the night before because it was tearing me up. I said I'm going to be too tired to practise.
"But then I thought, 'No, let's get back on the horse and play.' I simply did what I always do – and that's carry on. My old caddie Bruce Edwards, who died some years ago, always said the same thing after a double bogey: 'Just carry on.'"
Watson will continue his love affair with The Open on Thursday, knowing that his startling performance last year has secured his place in the tournament until 2014. The R&A responded to his near-miss by declaring that any previous Open winner who finished in the top 10 would receive a five-year exemption from qualification.
"It will definitely help control the emotions. This was expected to be my last Open and lots of people had already booked to come over more than a year ago. So there will be a large contingent of friends and family for me at St Andrews."
The last time he played the Old Course, in 2005, Watson was paired with Nicklaus, as his rival appeared at his final Open. Watson cried when Nicklaus started his long goodbye. "Jack had to say, 'C'mon, Tom, get yourself together because you've got a championship to play.' It was so emotional because Jack meant so much to the game in the way he played it and conducted himself. He said such poignant things in defeat. At Turnberry in 1977 [when Watson defeated Nicklaus in the epic "Duel in the Sun"] he squeezed me so hard afterwards but he said just the right thing: 'Tom, I gave it my best shot and it wasn't good enough.' I could feel the disappointment in his squeezing but the words were so gracious."
Tiger Woods may be the bookmakers' favourite again this week, but Watson's natural bonhomie curdles when we compare Nicklaus to the current world No1. "I don't know," he says flatly when asked how Woods may perform. Has Woods "taken ownership" of the mistakes he made in his private life – which was the phrase Watson used earlier this year when considering his public collapse? "I don't know yet. What really concerns me is how he treats the game. Everybody has their moments on the golf course with their temper. I've had my moments and so has Arnold [Palmer] and Jack and everyone. But it's important to keep yourself under control."
How has Woods conducted himself during his comeback? "I haven't watched him play. So I don't know. It's his call."
Will Woods regain his dominance and overtake Nicklaus's record of 18 majors? "I can't tell you. That's Tiger's world."
If not Woods, who does Watson think is most likely to shine at St Andrews? "Justin Rose has had a good run – he can do it," he says of the resurgent Englishman who has recently won twice in America. "Justin's impressed me most. But Lee Westwood is due a major. He's been there so often, particularly at last year's Open [when Westwood just missed the play-off]."
Westwood finished third in last year's USPGA, and second in the Masters a few months ago. "He's come so close, but it's easier to win a major once you've won before. It takes the burden away. Lee has to win the first one – and that's the toughest of all. But he can do it. I also like Rory McIlroy a lot. I'm really impressed with him. I played with Rory and Ryo Ishikawa [the Japanese prodigy] in the US Open and there's a lot of potential in those two."
Ishikawa and Watson have been grouped with the two-time Open winner Padraig Harrington on Thursday and Friday. They will have to contend with the course Watson once loathed. "I came to St Andrews in 1978 and didn't like it at all. Even though I had already won two Opens, I was not happy. I still preferred American-style courses, with smooth conditions, rather than where the luck of the bounce means you never feel in control. I still played well in 1978 and had the lead going into the last round. But I shot a 75 and Jack won it.
"At Lytham the following year, I was still sitting in my pity-pot, saying I don't like links golf. But suddenly I thought, 'Why are you complaining so much?' I remember playing the 7th and asking my caddie, 'Is this an eight- or a nine-iron?' He said 'eight' but I thought about it and said, 'No, it's a nine-iron.' I hit a nine-iron and it bounced and ran to about 10 feet from the hole. I knew then that this was what you have to do with links golf. It's never clear but you have to deal with it. You have to expect ambiguity in your decision-making. When you expect that then you stop getting mad at it."
Last year, at Turnberry, serenity descended upon Watson. On the day before the tournament, "I thought it was feasible for me to win. I was playing well on a course I knew better than anyone. I felt so serene on the Saturday, when my old caddie seemed with us in spirit. On the 18th I said to my caddie [Neil Oxman], 'Ox, Bruce is with us today.' I really felt that and of course Neil introduced me to Bruce in 1973. Bruce was looking for a new job and he and Neil were in the car park. Neil saw me and said to Bruce: 'Try that guy – he's supposed to be pretty good.'"
At 60, Watson finally feels "good enough" to have made his first golf- instruction DVD. "I was asked to do it years ago but I was not confident about my swing then [despite having won eight majors]. But I've learnt how to swing the club properly and after 50-odd years playing the game I think I now know enough to help people."
Watson will bring that same seriousness to his latest tilt at The Open. "Putting is the key at St Andrews and, at my advanced age, I need to be firing on all cylinders. At the moment I really don't know if I can win. But [tomorrow] I'll know for sure if I've got the serenity of last year."
A repeat of Turnberry is surely impossible, but Watson will still light up the course. The applause will roll and swell around him wherever he goes and St Andrews, and golf itself, will be stripped of its cruelty. "Yeah," Watson says, "it's going to be beautiful."
Tom Watson's Lessons of a Lifetime is released on DVD this week