Look at his happy little face.
Anthony Hughes writes: "It’s important not to get to swept away by United’s promising pre-season thus far; Liverpool really tested us and i was glad of that. I expect Van Gaal to show no favouritism in who he decides to axe. I also expect Van Gaal and Woodward to dial up the charm offensive and really push on and bid for some players like Vidal, Hummels, Carvalho, Cuadrado and possibly a surprise in the form of Di Maria. Will be facilitating to see how United cope come August 16. So buckle United faithful."
"Only pre season, but terrific display on United's account - Vidal and some creative wingers would be the correct response to the teams who think United have ended their winning spree," says Jake.
Kiran Kulkarni writes: "This is all about the principles of management & motivation. A certain Wayne Rooney last season was made to look like a God by Moyes & was rewarded with astronomical hike. But now he is playing for his United future.. Because if Van Gaal can take off Van Persie & bring on Huntelaar in an important WC match, Rooney should be the most worried man at Old Trafford."
Wayne Rooney has been named man of the match and player of the tournament. He wins a fishing trip to Lake Michigan and lifetime gold card for Taco Bell.
Full time: Manchester United 3 Liverpool 1. Prepare the open top bus parade because Manchester United are the International Champions Cup champions. Liverpool dominated the first half but two quick goals from Wayne Rooney turned the game United's way and, after the obligatory raft of substitutions, Brendan Rodgers' side never really looked like getting back into it. Lingard added a third late on and Louis van Gaal is up and running, though United are clearly a long way from being a really top side. Expect some frenetic transfer activity in the next few weeks
90 min: The official attendance is 51,014. They'll never forget this. Or at least they'll never forget the half-time show. "Nobody will get carried away with this," say MUTV commentator Stuart Gardner moments after Paddy Crerard outlined "courage, bravery and commitment" as the cornerstones of their performance tonight.
12 min: Penalty to Liverpool! Sterling goes down the left and is too quick for Phil Jones who chops him down inside the area. The United players complain but it seems a nailed on penalty to me. It was a typical Phil Jones tackle - i.e not a very good one.
11 min: Raheem Sterling is looking really lively so far - he's been Liverpool's best player of this pre-season campaign.
8 min: A chance for Henderson as Gerrard disguises a free kick and picks out his midfield colleague rather than shoot as everyone expects. Henderson elects to head goalwards rather than let it fall on the volley and gets it all wrong. Henderson really needs to add some goals to his game.
7 min: Early change for United as Luke Shaw comes on for a presumably injured Antonio Valencia. Young moves to the right and Shaw slots in the left.
4 min: It could - and should - be 1-0 to United. It's a lovely move starting with Valencia who works it wide to Young on the left. He cuts inside and picks out Hernandez inside the six-yard area but the Mexican defelects the ball away from goal on the stretch and Sakho hoofs clear before Mata can pounce. From the ensuiing corner Mignolet punches clear.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Mark Ogden - Poor crowd in Miami. Sun Life Stadium about half full.&lt;/noframe&gt;
2 min: Steven Gerrard is starting so deep he's almost a centre back in between Skrtel and Sakho. He's helping ping the ball around from what is now 'his favoured quarterback position', which is fitting in the home of Dan Marino. Liverpool win a corner on the right. Gerrard to take, poorly, and Young boots clear.
Peep!! The referee blows the whistle as Seven Nation Army continues to play over the tannoy but Liverpool get the game underway regardless.
01.00 If this stadium looks familiar it's because it was the scene of Wrestlemania XXVIII. That's exactly what you were thinking, wasn't it?
00.58 The teams are out on the pitch. Liverpool are in yellow. At least i think they are. The smoke from the pre-match fireworks has hung in the damp air and so the players are barely visible. Not a good start.
00.55 This is what we're playing for tonight - the International Champions Cup, a piece of silverware that makes the Barclays Asia Trophy seem like a meaningless tin pot handed out at the end of a shameless money-grabbing exercise. If this didn't feel real before it certainly does now.
"Aaron J has some ideas: "United definitely need to sign an experienced centre-back - wouldn't mind Vermaelen or Hummels. And the midfield still looks thin. Would go for Blind and Vidal. Then I'd probably sign myself on a six year contract because I'm skint."
"Who do Liverpool need to sign?" asks Nigel Rayner. "I'd go for that Uruguay forward, should get him on the cheap, he's banned you know ... We still need a world class striker to build on last year. Sign one and this could be the start of another golden era. Or not, and be as exciting as a Chelsea blame-a-thon."
Another email from New Zealand, this time from Che Lewis who amazingly identifies himself as "a Wilfried Zaha fan" (not a United or Liverpool fan). He writes: "I would like to provide my sincere thanks for your work. Also, slightly worried about Sterling breaking his legs as he trips over himself when Zaha out tricks him. Ashley Young is useless and should just stick to cleaning Zaha’s boots after the games."
00.43 MUTV, Roy Keane's favourite channel, have already have to apologise for wearing on air and there's still 17 minutes to kick off. They're blaming it on the humidity, a defence that is unlikely to stand up in a court of law, though it's unlikely to go that far.
00.37 Meanwhile, in our 'who would you like to see at your club vote' we have one vote for Mats Hummels at United, one vote for Arturo Vidal at United and one vote for two world class defenders at United.
Daniel Delahoyde writes from New Zealand: "As a United fan in New Zealand and currently needing a distraction from an interminable office job, I would like to provide my sincere thanks for your work. Also, slightly worried about Sterling's pace vs Young. He's not known for his defensive attributes is our Ashley, and he's not been properly tested against real pace on this tour."
00.30 The two teams are greeted with a chorus of boos as they come out to warm up at the Sun Life Stadium. Americans are really getting the hang of this football thing.
00.20 Tonight's fourth official is a Mr Ted Unkel. As you were
Manchester United XI: De Gea; Evans, Smalling, Jones; Valencia, Herrera, Fletcher, Young; Mata; Rooney, Hernandez. (Wayne Rooney will captain Manchester United).
Liverpool starting XI: Mignolet; Johnson, Skrtel, Sakho, Kelly; Gerrard, Allen, Henderson; Coutinho, Lambert, Sterling
12am Good evening/good morning enthusiastic pre-season friendly fans. Welcome to live coverage of the massive, massive clash between Manchester United and Liverpool in the final of the International Champions Cup, a competition so dextrous in its beauty that until a few days ago most of us didn't even know it existed, assuming instead that these fixtures between Premier League superpowers and the giants of European football were a series or arbitrary and seemingly meaningless contents played out in the pursuit of fitness and/or those sweet sweet dollar bills.
How wrong we were.
Now we know that the International Champions Cup is, in fact, the greatest competition known to man. It's the Europa League, the FA Cup, the Capital One Cup and the Inter City Fairs Cup rolled into one. It's that European Super League they have talked about for years, but with added tailgate parties, nachos and Budweiser.
One day there will chapters of books devoted to this game. Unfortunately those books will probably be chronicling how English football ate itself, but who cares. It's Manchester United v Liverpool. It's the middle of the night and it's all we've got. Right?
So on a scale of one to Paul Gascoigne in the 1991 FA Cup final, how pumped up are you right now? I'm pretty psyched. I'm away to get me suit measured and then I'll be back with team news and more build up from Miami, where it is bucketing down with rain. Perfect. T