Undergraduate entry requirements for students from United States of America.
American applicants must have, or expect to obtain, certain US qualifications.
Our requirements for students with US qualifications vary by degree programme.
Other than the general requirements listed below, each course may have further specific entry requirements.
All subjects in the College of Arts, Humanities and Social Science and the College of Science and Engineering require completion of the High School Diploma, plus one of the following as a minimum requirement:
In place of the old SAT scores above, we will accept scores from the new SAT taken from March 2016.
In the new SAT Reasoning, our admission office is looking for an overall score of 1290/1600 with 650 or above in Evidence Based Reading and Writing and 620 in Maths.
We will not be looking for the optional essay and we will not be super scoring between the old and new tests.
A combination of AP and SAT subject tests are acceptable provided they are in different subjects. For example, AP French and SAT Physics is acceptable as two qualifications, but AP French and SAT French is only considered once.
Entry to some degree programmes requires SAT subject tests or APs in specific subjects. These subject requirements are listed in the undergraduate prospectus.
If you are unsure of the subject requirements for your chosen degree programme, please contact the relevant college admissions office.
The subject specific requirements for our most commonly applied for degree programmes in the College of Arts, Humanities & Social Science can be found by following the link below.
Successful completion of the High School Diploma, plus one of the following options:
An ACT Composite score of 27 or above is accepted in lieu of SAT Reasoning Test requirement only.
** For Schools where Mathematics is a required subject (Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Informatics and Engineering) we will consider SAT subject test Mathematics 2 at 700 and a Calculus class within the high school diploma (including differentiation and Integration Calculus) plus further SAT subject test in place of AP Calculus.
Where we ask applicants taking Scottish Qualifications Authority (SQA) Highers and National 5s for a specific subject(s) we will ask you for the same subject(s) in your qualifications.
For subject specific entry requirements for Science and Engineering programmes, please contact the Admissions Office using the undergraduate admissions contact link below.
US candidates must normally have either studied APs, the International Baccalaurate (IB) or A level examinations.
3 APs all at 4 or above in Chemistry, Biology and either Maths/Physics would be required. If Physics has not been studied as part of the AP examinations, candidates must also provide evidence of a qualification at a minimum of SQA Standard Grade 2 or GCSE Grade B or equivalent in this subject.
All applicants to Veterinary Medicine will be expected to have relevant practical experience of handling animals.
Entry directly from high school will not normally be considered.
For Oral Health Sciences, Medical Sciences and Biomedical Sciences, requirements are the same as for the College of Science & Engineering (see above). Biology is a required subject for Oral Health Sciences. Biology and Chemistry are required subjects for Biomedical Sciences and Medical Sciences.
Applications for graduate entry to the MBChB will be considered for the programme with:
Pass in a 4-year undergraduate degree with a science major and a GPA of 3.4 or better plus, an MCAT score before 2015 of at least:
or, an overall total MCAT score after 2015 of 508 to include a minimum of:
Applicants must also take the UKCAT.
Each course may have further specific entry requirements. All applicants must meet these requirements. Staff in the Admissions Offices will be able to provide further guidance.
Advice for applicants from the United States of America on which documents you need to submit during your application to the University of Edinburgh, and how to submit them.
Advice for transfer students, who have completed one or more years of study at another institution and are applying to Edinburgh to complete their degree.
We have made a presentation specific to applicants from the United States of America, talking you through the admissions and decision making process, and introducing the city and the University.
If your first language is not English, you will also have to meet English Language requirements to apply. These requirements are listed by programme.
The International Office representatives for USA are Scott McQuarrie and Tessa Birley.
Scott and Tessa will help you with admissions advice and support.
Talk to a member of staff online and view a presentation about study in Edinburgh.
We will send you further useful information about the University, admissions and entry.
There are more than 2000 students from USA currently studying at the University of Edinburgh.