Joe Hart is likely to be rested, giving Willy Caballero a chance to make his debut in goal after his summer move from Malaga, while Dedryck Boyata and Matija Nastasic may also start.
"Willy Caballero will have one or two games in a row because he's a keeper and needs to play also," said Pellegrini.
The City manager will urge his players to treat Wednesday with respect after his side fell victim to Championship opponents in the FA Cup last season, when Wigan won at the Etihad.
He said: "When you play against a Championship team it is very difficult, the motivation is not the same and they always try to come here and win. Last season, we were eliminated here in the FA Cup against Wigan, a Championship team.
"We won the Capital One Cup last year and we hope tomorrow we can start in the same way we played in the competition, conceding I think just one goal [en route to the final] and winning all the games.
"Sheffield Wednesday have lost just one in the last 10 games, they but I am sure the team will be conscious of what we have to do if we want to continue in the Capital One Cup."
Wednesday come into the match having already seen off Premier League opposition in the competition this season, knocking Burnley out in the second round.
The Championship side have lost just once this season and remain without midfielders Kieran Lee (groin) and Sam Hutchinson (back).
Former City youth goalkeeper Keiren Westwood could face his former club although Chris Kirkland was used in the first two rounds of this competition and could play again.
When asked if Wednesday could inflict a shock, midfielder Jeremy Helan, who started his career at City, said: “Why not? They [City] are human beings. True, they have good players, are one of the best teams in the world, but on the day it’s a cup game and you don’t know what can happen.
“We will give it a go. Look what MK Dons did to Manchester United last month. They beat them 4-0."
- Pellegrini considers debut for 'Mini Messi' - Most epic penalty shootouts of all time - Rossiter took his opportunity, says Rodgers