Kalamazoo Outrage is an American soccer team based in Kalamazoo,
Michigan, United
States. Founded in 2007, the team plays in the USL Premier Development
League (PDL), the fourth tier of the American Soccer Pyramid, in the Great Lakes
Division of the Central Conference.
The team plays its home games in the stadium on the campus of Loy
Norrix High School, where they have played since 2009. The
team's colors are blue and white.
The team has a sister organization, the Kalamazoo Outrage Women,
who play in the women's USL W-League, and also
fields a team in the USL’s Super-20 League, a league for players
17 to 20 years of age run under the United
Soccer Leagues umbrella.
Outrage are not affiliated with the Kalamazoo Kingdom soccer club, which
competed in the PDL for many years until 2006, although Outrage's
original head coach, Stu
Riddle, was the head coach of Kingdom during its last
competitive season.
Kalamazoo Outrage's entry into the PDL was announced in late
2007, just as that season's competition was ending. The club is
part of the larger Kalamazoo TKO organization,
which has runs men, women's and junior teams in the greater
Kalamazoo area for many years. The acronym TKO apparently has no
official meaning - it was first coined by a former coach, Paul
Wolpert, when he was 11 years old and was part of a group of local
Michigan AYSO
players who participated in the Adidas Dominos Pizza Soccer
Tournament in Lansing, Michigan and called
themselves The Kalamazoo Outfit, or TKO for short.
Since then, TKO has been used as an acronym for Technical Knock-Out,
and even The Killer Oranges, both of which are
listed as being correct on the official TKO website.
On November 14, 2007, the club announced a player development
deal with one of England's oldest soccer teams, Sheffield Wednesday, who have a history of
working with American players (former USA international team player
John Harkes played
successfully with the Owls in the 1990s, and current international
Frank Simek is their
current first-choice right-back). The Owls further cemented their
link with the Outrage on April 16, 2008, when the Wednesday Academy
sent midfielder Scott Ellis to play with Outrage for the 2008
season, the player having impressed head coach Stu Riddle during their
educational trip to Wednesday's Middlewood Road training ground in
early 2008.
On May 13, 2008 the Outrage took part in the Old
Burdicks Challenge Cup, in which they defeated perennial
PDL powerhouse Michigan Bucks in their first ever
official match. The match, which was dubbed the "Battle of
Michigan", was settled on penalty kicks, with the Outrage emerging
as 5-4 victors. The scores were locked at 1-1 after 90 minutes with
former Plymouth Argyle schoolboy Dan
Bulley scoring the Outrage's first ever goal. Striker Chase
Corricelli scored the winning penalty kick.
Outrage's first weeks in PDL competition were extremely
positive: after tying 0-0 with West Virginia Chaos in their
opening game, they proceeded to win three of their next four
matches, including a comprehensive 4-0 win over 9-man Indiana
Invaders, and a 3-2 victory on the return fixture against West
Virginia. An unexpected 4-1 defeat at the hands of Cleveland Internationals at
the beginning of June notwithstanting, Outrage's impressive form
continued through the middle of the summer; three back-to-back wins
over Cincinnati Kings, West Michigan
Edge and Fort Wayne Fever kept them well in the
hunt for the playoffs. A couple of stutters in the run-in,
including two home defeats to Indiana and Michigan Bucks, briefly raised the heart
rate in Kalamazoo, but a playoff spot was secured following their
5-2 home victory against West Michigan Edge, which featured a
hat trick from midfielder Mark Briggs. Outrage entered the playoffs
having suffered a 2-1 final day defeat, again to Michigan, but
impressively overcame Chicago Fire Premier 2-0 in the
Divisional Round to take their place in the Central Conference
tournament in Pontiac, Michigan. Against the run of
form, Kalamazoo dispatched hot favorites Michigan Bucks 3-1 in their semi final,
following a late equalizer from Tom Oatley and two goals in extra
time. Despite being beaten 4-0 by eventual national champions Thunder Bay
Chill in the Central Conference final, Kalamazoo's impressive
debut season bodes well for the future. Mark Briggs was the team's top scorer, with
6 goals. It is also worth nothing that Kalamazoo striker Troy Mellanson
played for the Antiguan
national team in two of its qualifying games for the 2010 World Cup against Cuba on 17 June, 2008, and
22 June, 2008. [1]
Ferris State (D-I
hockey) • Grand Valley
State • Hillsdale • Lake Superior State (D-I
hockey) • Michigan Tech (D-I
hockey) • Northern Michigan (D-I
hockey) • Northwood • Saginaw Valley
State • Wayne
State (D-I hockey, women)
function checkEmail(myForm) {
if (/^\w+([\.-]?\w+)*@\w+([\.-]?\w+)*(\.\w{2,3})+$/.test(myForm.str_email.value)){
return (true);
alert("Invalid E-mail Address! Please use the format user@domain.com");
return (false);
function onSubmitValidate() {
//first check for any warnings regarding message type
thisform = document.genny;
if (!checkEmail(thisform)) {
thisform.str_email.focus();
return false;
if(thisform.str_name.value == '') {
alert('Please enter your name');
thisform.str_name.focus();
return false;
if(thisform.str_body.value == '') {
alert('Please enter your message');
thisform.str_body.focus();
return false;