The focus has been on Liverpool ‘getting Gerrard to Wembley’ but it is Brazilian Philippe Coutinho who is defining the Merseysiders’ cup run. The twinkle-toed South American must have taken a dislike to the Lancashire accent, or the taste of hotpot. After wrecking Bolton’s hopes of an upset earlier in the competition, he turned his attention to Blackburn Rovers. Coutinho’s strike on 70 minutes ended the resistance of the championship side in the quarter-final replay, and ensured Liverpool’s season – in danger of unravelling after back-to-back Premier League defeats – may yet end in triumph.
Meanwhile, Cafu's absolutely loving it!
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Cafu. - Cup semi finals for Liverpool!!! &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/Phil_Coutinho" target="_blank"&gt;@Phil_Coutinho&lt;/a&gt; scores the big gols!!!&lt;/noframe&gt;
A clearly relieved Henderson pays tribute after the game to Coutinho and the "immense" Kolo Toure.
And here are Mark Ogden's conclusions from the match, starting with his belief that Philippe Coutinho is Liverpool's player of the year.
Philippe Coutinho saved Liverpool’s skin against Blackburn and kept the club on course for the FA Cup final with his second-half winner, strengthening the Brazilian’s claim to be crowned the team’s player of the season. The 22-year-old No10 has certainly been the club’s most improved player and his work-rate and tenacity is an example to the likes of Daniel Sturridge and Mario Balotelli, who was absent again, this time due to an apparent illness.
Fitting that it was Coutinho who got the goal - he was comfortably Liverpool's best player tonight (as he's been in so many games recently). Again though, Liverpool looked like they'd lost the momentum of the January-March period and didn't really create a great deal.
Credit Blackburn for a superb effort tonight - they defended excellently and were only undone by a moment of real class from Coutinho. Liverpool weren't great and laboured for long periods, but they'll be so relieved to have got though to a semi against Villa where they'll be huge favourites.
Full-time: Liverpool hold on to book their place in the semi-final against Aston Villa.
Unbelievable scenes! Blackburn keeper Eastwood goes up for a long throw and it falls to him on the edge of the box - he controls it well and drills in a low shot that Mignolet just keeps out!
Sterling goes into the book for kicking the ball away.
Ooh, seen them given. Allen is bundled over in the box by Williamson, but Kevin Friend views it as a coming together and waves the Liverpool appeals away.
Four minutes of added time...after Toure heads clear with Gestede looking to profit in the box.
Sterling leads a Liverpool counter and gallops all the way from his own half before getting a shot off that drifts just over.
Lambert almost scores with his first touch, but he can't quite direct his header on target from Coutinho's free-kick.
Sturridge does really well to win his side a free-kick after getting his body between Olsson and the ball. It's the striker's last contribution before going off for Lambert.
Liverpool passing it around patiently and trying to suck the life out of the game. Blackburn getting more and more frustrated.
The hosts have gone a lot more direct now, and Gestede wins another flick-on that Cairney gathers but puts his effort over the bar.
Blackburn change - the injured Baptiste, who's been excellent, off for Spurr.
Raheem is furious after he's taken out off the ball by Williams - it's a straight arm into the mouth that looks accidental but certainly would have been painful.
Sterling has a go from distance, but the effort is really poor after some excellent quick feet from the youngster.
Liverpool now looking to turn the screw, and Sturridge nearly makes it 2-0 but his chip over Eastwood is a little too high and it flies just over.
Lucas is down after being clattered by Mignolet as he punches a cross. That looks pretty nasty, but he's ok to continue.
GOAL! Blackburn Rovers 0 Liverpool 1 (Coutinho 70') Blackburn don't clear the corner, and Coutinho exchanges passes with Henderson and smashes a shot low and hard that flies in off the post. What a wonderful finish that was, and the Liverpool players go wild in celebration.
Gestede makes an impression staright away - he flicks a header onto Rhodes, who takes on Toure but the defender gets across to make the block. Cairney takes the resulting corner, but Liverpool eventually get it clear after Gestede causes havoc in the box. Evans then gets a booking for Rovers after cynically hauling down Sterling.
Here we go, Rudy Gestede is coming on - taking the place of Conway in what's a pretty attacking sub, Blackburn now with two men up front.
Blackburn really have been tigerish in the tackle, and they're making life so difficult for their opponents. Gary Bowyer deserves a huge amount of credit for the way he's set his team up tonight.
The visitors are probing away, and making small inroads - this time it's Johnson who gets to the byline down the right but his low cross is weak, and Blackburn can hack it clear once more.
Sterling's seeing a bit more of the ball this half, and he almost plays Moreno in but the ball bounces up off the pretty lively pitch and the chances goes.
A reminder of the two subs benches incidentally:
Blackburn: Steele, Spurr, Songo'o, Nyambe, Lenihan, Mahoney, Gestede
Liverpool: Jones, Toure (on for Sakho already), Lambert, Manquillo, Borini, Brannagan, Markovic
Olsson does superbly to beat Johnson down the Liverpool left, and he looks like he may have been clipped by the Liverpool right-back in the box, but no penalty is given.
Liverpool threaten from a corner, but Kilgallon just gets his head to the ball before Lovren can't reach it. Blackburn are sat really deep now, and it's going to be tough for Liverpool to break them down.
Now it's Liverpool's turn to threaten, as Henderson is poised to slot home from about 10 yards, but the Blackburn defenders converge to bundle him out the way. A much better start to this half than the dross we saw in the first 45.
A bit of controversy as Allen moved his hand towards the ball to try and block Marshall's header that hit the post, but to be honest there's minimal contact and it would have been incredibly harsh.
So close! Blackburn on the front foot at the start of the half and Marshall hits the post with a header from a corner! Just prior to that Cairney looked to curl one from 25 yards, but Mignolet pushed it wide. Great start Blackburn.
We're back underway for the second half.
No word yet on Sakho's injury, but it looked like his hammy went, and that could be about six weeks out.
I'm not going to lie, that was pretty crud. In fact, it was really crud. It's basically attack v defence but the attack isn't very good and the pitch is dreadful.
Half-time: It's 0-0 at the interval as Eastwood makes another routine save from Johnson's tame effort.
One minute of time added on.
The visitors pushing for one before half-time, and Coutinho fizzes in a cross that Sturridge meets at the back post but he can't direct his header on goal.
Coutinho now has a go from distance that takes a deflection and dribbles through to Eastwood.
Coutinho lines up one of his specials from the edge of the box, but it bobbles up and flies way over the bar.
Liverpool very nearly take the lead in bizarre circumstances. Coutinho scuffs a shot from a corner that goes through a sea of bodies before Eastwood scrambles to his right to just bundle the ball away.
The commentators are suggesting that the longer the match goes on, the more that will favour Balckburn. But I would have thought the longer it goes on, the more you'd expect Liverpool's superior fitness to tell, especially as Blackburn have been chasing the ball around all game. We shall see I suppose.
Sturridge has another effort on goal, this time from about 30 yards that's well struck but straight at Eastwood, who can make an easy catch. The pressure is building a little now. Meanwhile Conway looks to have switched back to the right flank.
Johnson gets involved down the Liverpool right, and after his cross is blocked he squeezes a shot off on his left foot that Eastwood gets down to save.
Williamson is in trouble here for jumping into the back of Coutinho, but somehow he's escaped a booking. He went in knee first and really could have done the Brazilian some damage.
That said, it's Blackburn who create a decent chance. Sakho is clearly struggling with a hamstring problem and he can only stand and watch as Rhodes ambles into space and gets a header away, but it's over the bar. Sakho is having to go off with that injury incidentally, repolaced by Toure. So Liverpool now without all three first-choice centre-backs of Skrtel, Sakho and Can.
Marshall and Conway have switched flanks, but they're still struggling to build attacks and Liverpool are hoovering up possession.
Michael Owen very animated saying Gestede shouldn't be risked with a hamstring injury off the bench. Sounds like Owen's own hammy problems as a player still weigh heavily on his mind. Live blogger by night, amateur psychologist by day.
Sturridge gets into the game for the first time as he cuts inside onto his left foot and produces a curling shot from the edge of the box that Eastwood tips over. The ref though gives a goal kick oddly.
Henley at right-back is doing a great job so far on Sterling - snapping into tackles and letting the England winger know he's there right from the start.
Big warning sign there for Liverpool! Sakho gets in a complete muddle trying to shepherd Cairney's flick back to Mignolet, and Rhodes nips in before Sakho recovers to make the tackle. The French centre-back was at his clownish worst at the Emirates on Saturday, and it looks like he's carried on in a similar vein.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Gary Lineker - Sakho is an interesting defender.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Marshall does well down the Blackburn left but his cross is headed away by Moreno - first time the hosts have got into the final third.
Blackburn smothering Liverpool at the moment, but they do look a little short of a focal point without Gestede. Amazingly, Rovers have 11 first-team players out so this really would be a big upset.
Sturridge is changing his boots - something which "always frustrates" Michael Owen.
Sterling tries his luck from about 25 yards that moves in the air and hits the outside of the roof of the net. Memories there of that one he hit against Italy for England at the World Cup that I'm still convinced went in.
Liverpool seeing plenty of the ball early on, and the first chance of the night falls to Allen, who gets on the end of Baptiste's attempted clearance but drags his volley wide.
The pitch looks pretty dreadful - very slow and sticky, be interesting to see how it affects Liverpool's passing game.
Kick-off! We're underway - and a reminder of the teams, with Liverpool lining up in a 4-4-2.
This Barclays Alan Shearer ad really is abhorrent.
Jordan Rhodes is Blackburn's main dangerman, with 17 goals in 40 appearances this season - he also played in the two recent Scotland internationals. Remember the winner of this tie will play Aston Villa in the semi at Wembley on April 19.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Mark Ogden - The ever-optimistic &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/IanDoyleSport" target="_blank"&gt;@IanDoyleSport&lt;/a&gt; has just reminded me that it is 25 years to the day since Lpool lost an FA Cup semi to Crystal Palace.&lt;/noframe&gt;
And apropos of nothing, here's a classic moment from this fixture 19 years ago. It comes from February 1996 when Stan Collymore's pea-roller hits a divot and bounces over Blackburn keeper Tim Flowers. Incidentally, I really like how in the match report, the author says 'If you did not see it on Match of the Day, find a friend who taped it.' Oh, the Mid-1990s was a quaint time wasn't it?
A bit of guide to both team's form: Blackburn have won three out of five matches since drawing with Brendan Rodgers side a month ago. Liverpool meanwhile have lost their last two games having won nine of their previous 12. It all promises a whole lot of FA Cup magic. Or a comfortable 2-0 Liverpool win. Out of interest, has an FA Cup tie ever been played as far apart from its replay as this one (exactly a month)? Or is such a long gap relatively common? It feels like a month is absolutely ages. It's possible I'm making too much of this. Anyway, answers on a postcard please - or tweet me @cdeccleshare.
Thanks Blackburn - here is the Rovers team for tonight, as Rudy Gestede, who had such fun in the first leg, is named on the bench:
Blackburn: Eastwood, Henley, Baptiste, Kilgallon, Olsson, Conway, Williamson, Evans, Marshall, Cairney, Rhodes
Subs: Steele, Spurr, Songo'o, Nyambe, Lenihan, Mahoney, Gestede
Any danger of the Blackburn team being announced?
Here we go, it's quarter-final replay time. And the Liverpool team is in, as Lovren, Sturridge and Johnson replace Toure, Markovic and Can.
Liverpool: Mignolet, Johnson, Lovren, Sakho, Lucas, Allen, Henderson, Moreno, Sterling, Coutinho, Sturridge
Subs: Jones, Toure, Lambert, Manquillo, Borini, Brannagan, Markovic
It's the most magical time of the year: FA Cup quarter-final replay Wednesday! Charlie Eccleshare will be here from around about half past six to talk you through this evening's game. In the meantime, why not enjoy Chris Bascombe's excellent piece on the Raheem Sterling contract situation:
There’s a golden rule when assessing contract disputes. As soon as they say it’s not about the money, you know it is definitely about the money. Whether it’s about the pound, the euro, or the sterling, it is always about money.
Raheem Sterling sat there, the Liver Buildings in the background and the chance to 'put the record straight' about being the kid who values titles over wages directly ahead. The Liver Bird and a ticking clock were over his right shoulder - an appropriate image given this is seen as the beginning of the end of his Anfield career. We can appreciate the choreography.
Sterling played the game as instructed. It's the 'cake and eat it' strategy pursued by all those who want out, but fear being hammered for having itchy feet.
The intention was for Sterling to position himself as the innocent party in a mess of someone else’s creation. Here is how we are meant to interpret it.
Yes, Sterling turned £100,000 a week, yes he asked for more, but this is not about fast cars, this is about trophies. It would not matter what he was offered now, but a recent revelation he would reject £180,000 a week to play for Liverpool was not presented as intended so he needed to make it clear that was, in fact, a way of underlining this is not about money.
Are we clear about the money and it not being about it? Good, we'll continue.
Read the rest right here