Ed Dougherty carded a six-under
66 on Sunday to cruise to victory at the TD Waterhouse Championship. His 22- under
194 was eight better than Walter Morgan, Hugh Baiocchi and defending champion
Dana Quigley.
The 22-under tied the Senior
Tour's all-time 54-hole scoring record in relation to par. Raymond Floyd established
the mark in 1993 at the Gulfstream Aerospace Invitational. The 194 also equaled
the second lowest score in Senior Tour history.
Dave Eichelberger finished
alone in fifth at 13-under, followed by Dick Mast, Bruce Summerhays and Joe Inman
at minus-11.
"I'm ecstatic, really,"
said Dougherty, who walked away with $225,000 for his second win on the Senior
Tour. "I don't show my emotion, but I'm really thrilled. I've been waiting for
this for 32 years."
Dougherty was never challenged
on Sunday as he opened the round with a two- putt from for 40 feet for birdie
at one. He followed with another at the next hole when he played his eight-iron
approach to 12 feet.
The 53-year-old parred
the next seven holes for a front-nine 34.
He began the back nine
with a three-foot birdie at 10 and then chipped to three feet at the par-five
11th to set up another birdie. Dougherty dropped his only shot of the round at
13 when he three-putted for bogey.
Dougherty reclaimed the
lost shot when he wedged his approach at 14 to two feet where he rolled home the
birdie putt. He added an eight-foot birdie at 17 and then after he missed his
only fairway of the round, Dougherty rolled home a 12-footer for birdie to match
Floyd's record and grab the easy win.
"That's just a bonus, icing
on the cake, really," said Dougherty, referring to the record. "My only goal was
to have one of the three best rounds of the day."
The win was Dougherty's
first of the season and only his second on the Senior Tour. He visited the winner's
circle last season at the Burnett Classic.
Morgan fired an eight-under
64 on Sunday for the lowest round of the day. He had six front-nine birdies and
made his only mistake at 11 when he missed the green right.
Quigley mixed four birdies
and a bogey on Sunday for a 69 but the 2000 champion was philosophical about the
outcome.
"When you start off with
a five-stroke lead and then you birdie the first two holes, everybody else is
playing for second," Quigley said. "Ed was just a lot better than the rest of
us this week. He's played well all year."
Baiocchi could have finished
alone in second but a back-nine bogey dropped him into the tie for second.
Gil Morgan, Bob Gilder
and Walter Hall shared ninth place at 10-under-par 206.