AUSTIN, Tex., April 30— 
The General has sent out a call for his army to muster Sunday at the Onion Creek Club. Arnold Palmer is in the hunt again.
His platoons were out in medium strength today under threatening skies to witness Arnie and his aide de camp, Miller Barber, shoot a better ball score of nine-under-par 61. They charged from five strokes off the lead after two rounds into a three-way tie for the lead in the 11th annual Liberty Mutual Legends of Golf. This is a better-ball, two-man senior event at 72 holes of medal play.
With a 54-hole total of 19-under 191, Palmer and Barber were deadlocked with two teams of foreign golfers. Peter Thomson of Australia and Harold Henning of South Africa were at 191, as were Bob Charles of New Zealand and Bruce Devlin of Australia.
Thomson and Henning opened with three straight birdies on Henning's better ball and shot a 62 over the 6,357-yard, par-70 Onion Creek track. Charles, a southpaw, and Devlin, the leaders after two rounds, parred the first 12 holes today and then birdied four of the last six for 66. Three Teams Are Close
Orville Moody and Bruce Crampton of Australia, last year's Legends champions, were tied with two other teams at 192. Those teams were Butch Baird and Bobby Nichols plus Tommy Aaron and Lou Graham.
Deane Beman, the commissioner of the PGA Tour and Senior PGA Tour, and Al Geiberger made a big move with a 63 for 197. Geiberger got the seven birdies that his team posted.
Palmer's charge to the front with Barber excited the crowds and caused big smiles at NBC Sports, which will broadcast the final round Sunday from 4 to 6 P.M. Eastern dayligt time. Palmer still means ratings.
The 58-year-old Palmer depended on the 57-year-old Barber for most of the early charge today as Barber, known as Mr. X, got five of the team's first six birdies today. Then Palmer, who began putting like a much younger Palmer once did, sank a 15-footer at the 14th for a birdie and a 20-footer at the 16th for another birdie.
Barber finished the move to the front lines with a 7-iron tee shot and 8-foot putt on the 146-yard 17th, a par-3.
''Arnold has the old adrenaline flowing,'' Barber said. ''He's hitching up his pants and stepping out there on the fairways with his big stride like the old Arnie we know. As we got some birds, he said to me, 'O.K., X, let's go now.'
''Arnold is different from some of the other great golfers of the past. He still loves to compete. It's just his putting that has kept him from winning more recently. But those late putts today were like old Arnie.'' Barber Eludes Trees
Barber made the best shot of the day for his team's charge. It came as the second stroke on the par-5 seventh and led to the third straight bird for Barber and Palmer.
Mr. X pulled his drive at No. 7 way left into a line of huge trees. He had an opening of less than 5 feet between a couple of trees that were 20 feet ahead of him. But without hesitation, Barber pulled out a 2-iron and whacked the ball low under limbs and back out onto the middle of the fairway so he had 197 yards left to the pin.
He put a 3-iron shot 13 feet from the stick and sank the putt for the better-ball birdie 4.
On the next hole, Barber saved a par 3 for the team as both he and Palmer missed the green. He chipped over a bunker and within 6 feet of the hole and then sank the putt.
''It's going to take a 60 or 61 tomorrow for a team to win,'' Palmer said. ''I feel good about my putting and maybe I got it going for a charge.''
Henning, 53, made the first six of his team's eight birds today and Thomson, 58, got the last two.
Thomson, a five-time winner of the British Open in his younger days, said, ''My main contribution today was encouragement and praise.''
The 65-year-old Roberto de Vicenzo of Argentina and 64-year-old Charlie Sifford were leading those age 60 and up at 195.