League leaders Manchester City were held by Aston Villa as Remi Garde earned a point in his first Premier League game in charge.
Manuel Pellegrini's side had a penalty shout turned down in the first half when Raheem Sterling appeared to be brought down in the box while Kevin De Bruyne wasted a great chance as his attempt at a flick in the six yard box sailed wide of Brad Guzan's goal.
Fernando nearly claimed the points for City in injury time but his powerful header was denied by the crossbar.
So Aston Villa hang on (just) in Remi Garde's first game in charge, with Manchester City going one point clear at the top after that draw.
The bad news for them is title rivals Arsenal now host Tottenham Hotspur in the north London derby - and Spurs don't have the best record at the Emirates Stadium.
Join me for all the action in the derby on the above link, for now I'll leave you with the table at the top and bottom.
90+4min: More carnage in the box! But after a goalmouth scramble which sees a Guzan save, Villa desperately clear again. That really should be that now!
90+3min: Forward come City again. EVERYONE is back now for Villa but a cross into the box is collected by Guzan, and that should just about be that.
90+2min: Off the bar! Fernando's header smacks against the crossbar, while from the rebound, Delph drags a low shot wide narrowly wide of the post. Guzan is booked.
90+1min: There will be four added minutes as City press for a winning goal - they have another corner after Navas's cross is deflected behind.
90min: Last minute stuff before stoppage time and City win a corner. Villa though manager to clear through Alan Hutton.
87min: Just when you though the game was slightly petering out. Gestede is expected to throw the ball back to Joe Hart in a sporting gesture.
Instead he powerfully chucks it at the Man City keeper, who can only divert the ball out for a corner. The Man City players are furious with the Villa striker, who then goes on to to divert the controversial set-piece over the bar.
84min: A final switch for both teams then. Rudy Gestede is coming for Aston Villa in place of Jordan Ayew while Manchester City are sending on Iheanacho for Sterling.
81min: It's all Navas again! The winger beats his marker superbly on the right, but his cut-back for Sterling results in the forward trying to cleverly flick the ball on, only to run it behind De Bruyne as the chances passes.
78min: Some fans are displaying toy snakes in the crowd as Delph does come on to replace Yaya Toure. Can he silence the boo boys for Pellegrini's team?
77min: It's not Iheanacho coming on for Manchester City, but Fabian Delph. You don't even need eyes to know that - the boos around Villa Park are almost deafening as he prepares to come on.
74min: City are running out of time to snatch this, so it surprises me to see Kelechi Iheanacho hasn't been thrown on yet.
The 19-year-old may be a raw talent but judging by his cameos this season there are goals in him.
71min: A second change for Aston Villa as Scott Sinclair departs in favour of Lenadro Bacuna. Remi Garde seems to be happy with a draw at this stage.
70min: Instead, Villa nearly take the lead. N'Zobgia beats offside to run onto a byline pass, where he puts a cross into the box for Sinclair who is narrowly beaten to a header by Bacary Sagna.
69min: It's gone very quiet inside Villa Park. The home fans perhaps watching on nervously as their side try to hold out Manchester City.
Their side have done well so far with just 21 minutes left.
66min: What a chance for City! Navas, who has been a creative spark this half, bolts down the right before playing a perfect low cross into the box.
It finds De Bruyne, but the forward's attempt to flick it in with his back foot results in him scuffing the effort back across goal and wide. Keep it simple!
65min: So here is Remi Garde's first change as Aston Villa manager as Charles N'Zogbia replaces Gil.
62min: How long can Villa hold out here? City are looking much more dangerous than the first half, with Villa's defending starting to become desperate as playing their way out of trouble has turned into hacking clear.
59min: Lots of defending for Villa as we approach the hour mark, a byline Kolarov cross finds Navas at the back post, but his squared pass for Sterling results in the forward failing to get a shot away.
Remi Garde appears to be holding discussions with assistants about possible changes for Villa.
56min: Those two chances have perhaps forced Villa back a bit as Manchester City continue to prove for an opening goal. Every Villa player is inside his own half.
53min: Superb Guzan! Much of good goalkeeping is positioning and the Aston Villa stopper is spot on in that regards as he keeps out a point-blank nodded effort from Sterling with his head!
Big shout for Jesus Navas too who supplied the sensational cross into the centre. City are kicking it up a gear.
52min: Lucky Guzan. Kolarov goes for goal with a powerful effort and although it's straight at the Villa keeper, he fumbles the ball into the six-yard box before his defence bail him out of trouble.
51min: There was one change on the Villa bench at the break, Garde has come out wearing a coat for this half as rain begins to fall at Villa Park.
City win a free-kick out wide on the right which De Bruyne and Kolarov stand over...
48min: Manuel Pellegrini would have been concerned with his side's lack of urgency before the break, but whatever he said at half-time it's not having much effect.
Like the first period, it's a very slow start to the half.
3 - Aston Villa have won only three of their last 23 Premier League games that have been 0-0 at half-time (D7 L13). Crumble.
No Aguero, no Bony - Manchester City need someone to step up and provide the goals.
Raheem Sterling is one shout (providing he can stay on his feet) but Kevin de Bruyne will also be a key figure in this regard during the second half.
Here is his first half heat map, and you can find his match stats on the link below.
Kolarov may have had an acute angle shot tipped on to the post by Guzan, but otherwise Aston Villa have had a comfortable first half under new boss Remi Garde.
If they did some defensive work on the training ground during the week, it's paying off big time.
Manchester Meanwhile are struggling. There is little threat form the visitors and they have also seen Wilfried Bony go off injured.
8 - Eight of Man City's last nine PL goals against Aston Villa have come in the second half. Patience.
45min: There will be one added minute to the end of the half.
42min: Gil's resulting free-kick comes to nothing, and having seen the Sterling penalty claim again, it does look like Clark slightly clips the forward.
Still not enough in my mind to justify his ridiculous tumble though.
39min: Villa haven't really had much of this half but they do have the advantage when it comes to diving.
Gil leaps over an outstretched foot of Nicolas Otamendi who is booked for 'bringing down' the midfielder. Harsh.
37min: Now is that a penalty? The rule book would perhaps argue it is, but I'm giving it a straight flat out no on the basis of pure common sense.
Sterling picks up a pass before charging forward and cutting inside on the edge of the box.
But in trying to beat Ciaran Clark he appears to kick the outstretched foot of the defender before going down weakly and claiming a penalty.
34min: Villa Park finally finds a voice. Aston Villa lead a break down the right but Carles Gil is the furthest man forward, and his legs are not the quickest.
Despite appearing to get past Fernando, the City midfielder does just enough to put off the midfielder as Kolarov manages to get back to win the ball.
31min: Instead it looks like like Kevin de Bruyne will be leading the City threat... I say threat, the visitors are yet to have a single shot on target.
'Villa have looked a bit brighter when they break on City but haven’t come close to creating a real chance yet.
'They seem to lack a focal point. City, on the other hand, look much more likely scorers though Bony’s absence presents then with a problem as Sergio Aguero is not yet ready to return from his own hamstring tear.'
25min: You don't get the magic sponge on an injury like that, so it's a first change for City as Jesus Navas replaces Bony. I would guess Raheem Sterling would now lead the City attack.
22min: Problems for Manchester City, big problems. Sergio Aguero is already injured and now their second striker Wilfried Bony has limped off with what looks like a hamstring injury.
19min: Another decent opportunity for a City cross as Fernando and Kevin de Bruyne link up before the latter's ball into the box is blocked behind.
16min: It's been a slow old start, in this game, but we do finally have a shot on goal...sort of as Idrissa Gueye blasts way over the crossbar.
13min: Still just that dangerous Kolarov cross as our action on goal so far, as Aston Villa now enjoy a spell of possession.
10min: Manchester City are starting to have a bigger influence on the ball now, but at least Aston Villa are learning lessons.
Kolarov is again spotted in space on the left but Alan Hutton cuts across to make a crucial tackle.
'Three minutes in at Villa Park and Remi Garde is already doing the 'what the hell was that' gesture on the touchline. City, meanwhile, may have a problem with captain Vincent Kompany who fell awkwardly early on.'
4min: Aston Villa have started well enough but they are given a little warning as Raheem Sterling feeds Aleksandar Kolarov's overlapping run on the left, with the full-back's fizzing cross across the six-yard box begging to be tapped in. The ball instead skids to safety.
'As expected, Fabian Delph receives a rather hostile reception. He is loudly booed on his walk from the tunnel to dugout and an unflattering chant goes up. Expect more each time he runs to warm up.'
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more.
It's an overcast afternoon in the West Midlands as both teams make their way out.
The players gather around the centre-circle and there will be a minute's silence before kick-off for Remembrance Sunday.
Having been in the stands for Aston Villa's 3-1 defeat by Tottenham Hotspur on Monday, Remi Garde takes the axe to his team for his first game in charge.
Micah Richards comes in to face his former club (along with Scott Sinclair) as does Jordan Amavi, Jordan Veretout, Idrissa Gueye, Carles Gil and Jordan Ayew come in.
Manchester City make one change from the side who beat Sevilla 3-1 in the Champions League midweek, with Kevin de Bruyne replacing Jesus Navas.
Fabian Delph is on the bench as he returns to Villa Park for the first since his controversial switch in the summer.
Aston Villa: Guzan, Hutton, Clark, Richards, Amavi, Sanchez, Gueye, Gil, Veretout, Sinclair, Ayew.Subs: Bacuna, Lescott, Richardson, N'Zogbia, Bunn, Gestede, Grealish.
Man City: Hart, Sagna, Otamendi, Kompany, Kolarov, Fernandinho, Fernando, De Bruyne, Toure, Sterling, Bony.Subs: Caballero, Jesus Navas, Delph, Mangala, Clichy, Demichelis, Iheanacho.
Guzan, Hutton, Richards, Clark, Amavi, Gueye, Veretout,Sanchez, Gil, Ayew, Sinclair.
Team news: Confirmed #AVFC side to face #MCFC this afternoon. #AVLMCI pic.twitter.com/Qx5N58smfr
Hart, Sagna, Kompany, Otamendi, Kolarov, Fernando, Fernandinho, Toure, De Bruyne, Sterling, Bony.
Your #mcfc line-up in full to face @AVFCOfficial... #villavcity pic.twitter.com/m086nDL1Tm
Welcome to the Premier League, Remy Remi Garde!
Your first match in charge of the table's bottom side is to host the league leaders Manchester City.
Can the former Lyon boss's arrival spark a revival at Villa Park or will Manuel Pellegrini's side pile on the misery in the West Midlands?
Good afternoon, all. Welcome to Sportsmail's live coverage of Aston Villa vs Manchester City.
Follow Sportsmail's coverage of the Barclays Premier League as Aston Villa host Manchester City at Villa Park to get Sunday's action underway.
It's top against bottom in the West Midlands, but the struggling hosts have Remi Garde in their dugout for the first time after the former Arsenal midfielder took over as manager on Monday following the sacking of Tim Sherwood.
Man City will aim to extend their lead at the top of the table to three points with victory at Villa, as nearest rivals Arsenal face Tottenham Hotspur later on in the afternoon.