The Saints huddle before last year’s home opener.(Photo: Provided/Cincinnati Saints)
The Cincinnati Saints want to be Over-the-Rhine's team.
And they could be. If the semi-professional soccer team can mobilize an underground soccer community. If they can create an intimate home-field experience at Taft High School. If they can make this hotbed of youth soccer into a city of soccer fandom.
Cincinnati has seen pro soccer before, first with the Cincinnati Excite, and more recently, the Kings. Both failed quickly.
Today the 6-year-old Saints are officially Cincinnati's longest-running men's pro team. The club began as a community service project to get more kids playing soccer in 2009. Hence the name "Saints."
It was an inauspicious start: The Saints' first indoor game drew exactly 12 fans. Now, six years in, the semi-professional soccer club is hoping to push the world's favorite sport to new heights in Cincinnati.
So what makes the Saints different?
"Infrastructure," says club CEO David Satterwhite, a former player on the Cincinnati Excite, who wants to style the Saints after "the European model." That means starting slow and building a solid fan base.
It also means developing youth teams and bringing talent "through the system." In Europe, clubs like FC Barcelona have youth academies where kids start training sometimes as early as 7-years-old. The Saints aren't there yet, but developing young talent and keeping fresh interest are key to ensuring the long-term success of the club, Satterwhite says.
Last year, upwards of 500 fans showed up for games. This year, the Saints are hoping for twice that.
The Saints are in the Midwest Division of the 70-team National Premier Soccer League (NPSL). This year, the Saints' schedule includes dates with FC Buffalo, Indiana Fire and Detroit City FC.
But the Saints are hoping to replicate the success of the Portland Timbers. In 1975, the Timbers began life in a minor soccer league called the North American Soccer League, or NASL, similar to today's NPSL. Through a string of winning seasons and record attendance, the Timbers eventually moved to the United Soccer League, a larger league, through a process familiar in Europe known as progression and relegation.
In the U.S., only soccer has this path for team advancement. But it worked so well in Portland that the Timbers soon went from the United Soccer League, where they drew more and more fans and kept winning, to the professional ranks of Major League Soccer.
It's a matter of fan support and money. The next step for the Saints is the USL. That would requires the show of city support and a $500,000 buy-in on the part of the team and proof of least a $1 million dollar operating budget.
The focus for the Saints, for now, is on what immediately lies ahead: putting out a professional product that attracts fans. Getting 1,000 fans on a regular basis, for a season that runs just May through July, would be a solid step for Satterwhite and the Saints.
"Obviously, we're not Bayern Munich (a world-class German club team) in terms of talent on the field yet," Satterwhite said. "But we want the overall experience to be what you'd expect of a pro team – sideline reports, concessions, fan engagement, live streaming games online – all of that."
To that end, the Saints have announced the hiring of Lindsay Patterson, whose credentials include producing for ESPN local affiliate WCKY-AM, as the new sideline reporter for the club.
As for fan experience, the Saints made headlines earlier this spring by lobbying Taft High School to allow them to sell beer at Taft Stadium during Saints games. The matter is still under consideration.
"We really want to create a Wrigley Field experience," Satterwhite said. "That's why we chose Taft (High School) for our games. It's right next to OTR, and that's our target audience. We want to see people making a night out of it, coming to games, then going out in OTR."
But this year, that plan is on hold. The Saints won't be playing at Taft this summer. The school's football field is being renovated. "So we're playing at Withrow," Satterwhite said. "Which is a nice field, but not ideal location-wise for what we're trying to build."
The Saints are trying to build on the long-talked-about hopes for the sport's serious success in the United States, success that pays.
But this could be coming. Business Insider reports that NBC Sports pays $80 million a year for rights to broadcast the English Premiere League, and $30 million for the MLS here in the U.S.
"You see all these guys coming to Rhinehaus (OTR bar) on Saturday mornings to watch EPL (English Premiere League) games," Satterwhite said. "Those are the fans we need to mobilize and get to the Saints' games."
"I always say that Cincinnati soccer fans dictate their own fate," the club CEO said. "If they turn up for games, we're going to keep building."
The Saints have players from Jamaica, Honduras, England and Ireland on the roster. "But only about five people on our whole staff actually get paid anything," Satterwhite said, adding he's not one of them. Neither are the players. Minimal costs may be covered, but there's no salary.
"Everyone in this is doing it for one reason, and one reason alone," Satterwhite said. "The love."