Tottenham fell to a 2-1 defeat in their final home game of the season against a Southampton side still gunning for a place in next term's Europa League.
South Korea international Son Heung-min gave Spurs the the lead at White Hart Lane, latching on to Erik Lamela's threaded pass before rounding Saints goalkeeper Fraser Forster.
The visitors equalised, however, through Steven Davis with the midfielder converting Shane Long's low cross from close-range. Davis doubled his and Saints' advantage in the 72nd minute with a right-footed shot from outside the box.
So as Tottenham continue to implode, that gives Arsenal all the incentive they need to win and move level on points with their north London rivals.
All the White Hart Lane fall-out is to come on the homepage but be sure to join me for all the action in the weekend's last two games as Arsenal face Manchester City and Liverpool take on Watford. Click here for more.
Right here though I will leave you with an updated top seven....
90+5min: There's the chance for Spurs - and it's gone! A free-kick lands for Chadli inside the box but his snatched shot is pushed behind by Forster.
90+3min: Instead it''s Southampton creating the chances. Long leading a counter before squaring for Ward-Prowse who blasts just wide from 20 yards.
90+1min: It will be five added minutes at White Hart Lane as Southampton close in on a huge victory concerning their chase for a Europa League spot.
89min: One minute to go plus a hefty chunk of stoppage time after that drinks break as Spurs look for an equaliser.
In truth they could play until next week and they wouldn't get it. I can't remember the last time Fraser Forster even had a save to make - maybe that Kane chance at the end of the first half?
86min: Final change for Southampton as James Ward-Prowse comes on in place of Tadic - who set up both of Southampton's goals.
19 - Since making his debut in August 2014, only Fabregas (25) and Ozil (23) have more PL assists than Dusan Tadic. Saintly.
85min: After many minutes of rather pointless Tottenham sideways passing which Southampton are happy to deal with all day long, the ball works its way out to Walker whose cross is headed wide by Dier.
83min: Yellow card for Shane Long after he clatters into Lloris who rushed out his box to beat the striker to a through ball.
81min: Southampton are briefly down to 10 men for the moment as Romeu is treated for an eye injury. Spurs meanwhile look no close to an qualiser. Having thrown away a title charge, it looks like second place is in danger of slipping away from the hosts too now.
What is it with Tottenham and late season capitulations?
78min: Second change on the way for Tottenham as Nacer Chadli comes on in place of Mason. The hosts still labour in front of goal.
76min: Lamela wins a free-kick 30 yards out but the danger passes with the Argentine striking the dead ball over the bar.
74min: Spurs fans are staying with their team, as Romeu is booked following a late tackle.
72min: What's in those Southampton drinks?! Steven Davis is on target again, starting a one-two on the edge of the box with Tadic before firing into the bottom corner.
68min: Better from Spurs as Southampton start to lose a little of their composure. Kyle Walker sees a 20-yard shot blocked behind, while play stops for a drinks break called by the referee.
I thought these sort of things were reserved for World Cups and pre-season friendlies but there you go...
65min: Changes for both teams. Clinton N'Jie - injured since December - replaces Son for Spurs while Southampton take off Mane and send on Graziano Pelle.
62min: Southampton are still looking sharp on the counter attack, but as Sadio Mane attemnpted to charge through the centre, he is denied by a brilliantly timed sliding challenge by Eric Dier. The more Spurs look for a breakthrough the more they look susceptible to conceding.
59min: Coming up to the hour and Spurs look out of ideas as Kane rifles well wide from distance. Spurs players are warming up but an already depleted side does look short of attacking options to carve open an organised Southampton outfit.
58min: Southampton are making their first change as Jordy Clasie departs in favour of Oriol Romeu
54min: And win the ball they do! The Saints then proceed to storm down the other end on the counter before Tadic's cross from the left is headed wide by Shane Long. Ronald Koeman is winning this particular tactical battle against Mauricio Pochettino.
53min: Plenty of Spurs possession...not much end product though. Tottenham are going from side-to-side but are not creating a single chance. Southampton are just waiting to win the ball.
50min: Spurs have a free-kick though and it brings a first yellow card after Mane's lunge catches Rose on the byline.
48min: The pattern has resumed from the first half. Spurs look to call the shots but Southampton are more than happy to play on the counter attack.
The Saints look a little more street wise to the point I'd actually back them to score next.
Great moment as @mousadembele invites eight-year-old Marshall to join the subs for their half-time drills. pic.twitter.com/KtLDFVGWKI
If Tottenham are to move back in front and secure second spot, they will hope Christian Eriksen can continue on from an impressive first half.
The Dane was a menace to the Saints back four in the opening exchanges and while he faded as the half wore on, he will be key for Mauricio Pochettino's men in the second period. Here is his heat map from the first half.
Tottenham didn't look like they were missing Mousa Dembele or Dele Alli after going 1-0 up, but that was a strong first half from Southampton who look a rather handy side on the counter attack as they battled back to level.
Considering the last time Spurs played they were given nine yellow cards, it's good to see a decent first half of football from both sides rather than all-out assault.
Speaking of yellow cards - there have been none so far...
45+3min: How are Spurs not back in front? Dreadful defending from Jose Fonte allows Kane to run along the byline but as he cuts inside, his near post shot is saved by Forster before Eriksen's follow up is blocked behind for a corner. Big chance wasted by the hosts.
45min: There will be three added minutes, with Southampton looking the better team here as they look to hit Spurs on the counter attack. Spurs have fizzled out after a bright start.
42min: It's a very hot day at White Hart Lane but Southampton's pressing has been remarkable. They certainly are not on the beach, and there is no doubt that in this first half they have been more than a match for the hosts.
39min: Spurs win successive corners but fail to do much with them. The latter falls for Danny Rose 30 yards out, but despite a dummy first touch, his resulting shot on goal is way off target.
7 - Dusan Tadic has been involved in seven goals in his last four Premier League games (scored 2, assisted 5). Scheming.
36min: Now Southampton have injury worries as Sadio Mane has taken a knock following an innocuous clash with Lamela, but following treatment he too will continue. Spurs back on the attack in what has been an entertaining first half.
33min: Kyle Walker was injured in the build up to that goal following an aerial clash with Bertrand and as a result we have only just restarted. The good news for Spurs is that he is able to continue.
31min: Taking the lead hasn't been a problem for Tottenham in recent games - keeping hold of it has been though.
Lloris has to take the blame for this latest lapse though as Southampton get their rewards for pressing Spurs as a Tadic byline cut-back for Steven Davis at the near post result sin the midfielder squeezing a shot under the Spurs keeper.
68 - Spurs have now recorded their highest tally of goals in a single Premier League season. Firepower.
29min: Brave defending from Danny Rose who standing in front of his own goal turns a dangerous Ryan Bertrand cross wide for a corner, one which Lloris punches clear.
Southampton are coming back into the game at the Lane.
27min: Half-chances at both ends. Danny Rose wins the ball inside the Spurs box but runs into trouble to lose the ball before Spurs scramble clear...eventually.
Meanwhile, Lamela's lay-off for Eriksen result sin the midfielder firing straight at Forster,
24min: Half-chance for Spurs as Kyle Walker crosses to the near post but Harry Kane is well marshalled as he fires off target.
22min: Lots of long balls from Southampton so far. Not in the 'up and at 'em style', but the Saints are looking to try and catch Spurs and their pressing game out.
So far Hugo Lloris has read most of them well, but it will be interesting to see if Ronald Koeman sticks with it as a tactic.
19min: Much talk was about how Spurs would react this afternoon but so far their effort has been faultless.
Southampton haven't really had a sniff since falling behind.
16min: Excellent goal form Spurs. Son Heung-min darts forward before laying the ball off for Erik Lamela.
The forward's through ball passes Harry Kane, who is offside but does not attempt to play the ball, and it allows Son to nip in and take the ball past Forster before slotting home.
12min: Son Heung-min instead tries the low cross from a byline position at the other but despite the ball fizzing along the six-yard box there are no takers in a  white shirt. Good start to this game from both teams.
11min: Excellent football from Southampton! Sadio Mane's through ball into the box finds Dusan Tadic, whose low effort across the face of goal zips just wide.
In truth a less selfish back post cross for Steven Davis to tap home was the better option, but that chance is a reminder that Southampton are not just at the Lane to defend...
8min: Just that Eriksen chance the only real threat on goal but the Dane looks on form in these early moments.
The playmaker has been central to much of Spurs' attacks and Southampton are struggling to deal with him.
5min: Spurs are back to the sort of football that made them title contenders in the first place as they knock it around with patience - rather than kicking lumps out of Southampton.
In fact they should be in front but a superb low ball in from Danny Rose although diverted on target by Christian Eriksen is brilliantly saved by Fraser Forster.
'Mousa Dembele song is the first one out for Spurs fans. Quickly followed by the Dele Alli song. Support for the banned at White Hart Lane.'
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more.
Here is how the table looks before kick-off. A win for Spurs would just about seal second given their superior goal difference. Four points over two games would make it certain.
Southampton look for a win which would take them into sixth.
'Sunshine and sprinklers before the game at White Hart Lane. There is no detectable mood of dejection after the title bid ended at Chelsea on Monday.
'More anticipation at the chance to clinch second for the first time since 1963 and above Arsenal for the first time since 1995.'
Maya Yoshida sure looks frightened over something during the warm up...
'After Monday it was disappointing for us and the players but we still need to fight and win two games and this afternoon is a very good opportunity, but we need to be proud.
'It's very important to keep our position, we need to still fight and win games to be sure of second but this is our objective and challenge.
'I think they [Southampton] have a very good squad and a great manager and they showed this season they have great quality.'
'We like to continue winning. We have a very good last part of the season. We look strong and confident. They [Tottenham] will have a reaction.
'They are disappointed after losing the title but still they need to fight for second and I expect a strong Tottenham and we need to be at our best to get a good chance.'
The lads head out to warm up in the sunshine... ☀️ #COYS pic.twitter.com/n3FKTQZZAa
RORY BRIGSTOCK-BARRON: Leicester might be No 1 in England, but former Tottenham striker Mido is now No 1 all over after Claudio Ranieri's men claimed the Premier League title.
The Egyptian was left cursing his former club after vowing to have his head shaved if Spurs did not beat the Foxes to top spot in England's top flight.
Before beIN Sports' broadcast of Leicester's 3-1 win over Everton, the 33-year-old, who retired in 2013, was shorn on camera as his colleagues in the studio tried to contain their laughter.
ALEX BYWATER: Tottenham Hotspur can go one better than this year and do something special in the Premier League next season under Mauricio Pochettino, according to Southampton defender Jose Fonte.
Spurs came so close to title success this year – only losing out to surprise winners Leicester City – with Pochettino impressing during his time at White Hart Lane.
And Saints centre back Fonte, who played under the Argentine boss during his time at St Mary's, believes it will only be a matter of time before he leads the London club to further success.
And it's an enforced one for Tottenham, with Mousa Dembele's suspension for his clash with Diego Costa resulting in Ryan Mason coming into the side that drew 2-2 at Chelsea.
Southampton name the same team that impressively saw off Manchester City 4-2 in their last outing.
Watch as we run you through all the team news from White Hart Lane, ahead of #SaintsFC's clash with Spurs: https://t.co/8P3B64E21H
Tottenham Hotspur: Lloris, Walker, Alderweireld, Vertonghen, Rose, Dier, Mason, Son, Eriksen, Lamela, Kane.Subs: Vorm, N'Jie, Chadli, Wimmer, Carroll, Winks, Davies.
Southampton: Forster, Martina, van Dijk, Fonte, Bertrand, Wanyama, Clasie, Mane, Steven Davis, Tadic, Long.Subs: Cedric, Yoshida, Romeu, Ward-Prowse, Pelle, Stekelenburg, Austin.
The teams are in!#SaintsFC are unchanged for the clash with Spurs! Here's the line-up in full: pic.twitter.com/1Ec2BPJG1y
#THFC team: Lloris (c), Walker, Alderweireld, Vertonghen, Rose; Dier, Mason; Lamela, Eriksen, Son; Kane. #COYS pic.twitter.com/fjzxyLBUcD
Already merchandise is starting to go on sale regarding the departure of the old White Hart Lane, with next season the last time Spurs play at their home ground before major development begins on a new stadium.
In fact today I believe may be the last game where the existing Paxton Road end is used in full.
That's a lot of thinking for the future, so let's focus on the now. Team news coming up next...
So get your pens and diaries out... or if you're modern just make note of it on your smart phone.
For those of us who have been involved in football over a fair few decades now, it’s difficult to comprehend just what Leicester City have done this season.
Bitterly disappointed as I was on Monday night as a lifelong Tottenham man, you couldn’t help but admire the sheer audacity and spirit of Leicester.
I try to put it into context and struggle to do so. Denmark came off the beach in 1992, when they only qualified because of the late exclusion of Yugoslavia, to win the European Championship.
Of course the irony of it all on Monday after Tottenham blew a two-goal lead to draw 2-2 at Chelsea and fall out the title race, was that the result secured their place in the UEFA Champions League next season - their target at the start of the campaign.
But there are still boxes to be ticked at White Hart Lane, namely a highest ever Premier League finish, points recorded and of course finishing above Arsenal for the first time since 1995.
Spurs are known to implode when it comes to finishing above the Gunners though, so without Dele Alli and Mousa Dembele it will be interesting to see how they respond to Monday's meltdown.
Good afternoon, all. Welcome to Sportsmail's live coverage of Tottenham Hotspur vs Southampton.
Follow Sportsmail's coverage of the Barclays Premier League as Tottenham Hotspur host Southampton at White Hart Lane to begin Sunday's top flight action.
Despite seeing their Premier League title dreams ended on Monday, Spurs are still on course for their best ever finish in the Premier League, with victory over the Saints enough to all but secure the runners-up spot behind Leicester City.
But with key midfielders Mousa Dembele and Dele Alli ruled out through suspension, Europa League chasing Southampton will be keen to ensure an excellent season for the north London side could still end on a sour note.