Liverpool held on to prevail in a seven goal thriller at the Emirates Stadium.
Theo Walcott opened the scoring for the Gunners, having already had a penalty saved, but Philippe Coutinho’s magnificent freekick leveled in first half stoppage time.
Adam Lallana, Coutinho and a brilliant Sadio Mane strike surged Liverpool into a 4-1 lead. However Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and Calum Chambers reduced the deficit, but Jurgen Klopp’s men held on for the three points in a pulsating battle in north London.
Not that Arsenal fans will take consolation. There were boos at full-time inside the Emirates Stadium, while the Wenger Out brigade are already calling for the Arsenal boss to go.
It is still only the first weekend of the season but what a win for Liverpool - just their second at the Emirates Stadium.
That's all from me here but after a game like that you can bet more is to come on the homepage. So thanks for following folks and cheerio.
2 - This is the 1st time in the English top-flight since 1953/54 that the top 2 from the previous season have lost their opening game. Stun.
90+3min: Credit to Liverpool here as they still look to play on the counter attack. Jordan Henderson collects a pass 25 yards out before his rising shot deflects over for a corner.
It's the next best thing to a goal for Liverpool as it gives them an opportunity to kill some time.
90+1min: Here come Arsenal on the attack again and they have five minutes to find an equaliser - and the way this game is going - maybe a winner too?
88min: Final change for Liverpool as Kevin Stewart, once of Tottenham, replaces Wijnaldum. Liverpool are doing their best to keep Arsenal at bay by retaining possession.
86min: And as Arsenal sense time is running out they are taking a few chances. Granit Xhaka is booked after tripping a Liverpool player following a very poor first touch.
85min: Well this could certainly be Liverpool's as Roberto Firmino sees a deflected shot skim past the side netting with Petr Cech stranded.
82min: So just under eight minutes left and for the first time since going 4-1 up, Liverpool have enjoyed some comfortable possession.
I still think there is one more goal in this game - or at the very least a huge chance. It's far from over that's for sure.
76min: Divock Origi is now on for Liverpool as he replaces Adam Lallana but it's all Arsenal pressing at this stage.
What a game to start the season!
75min: It certainly isn't all over now! Arsenal really are in with a shout of some points as Calum Chambers heads home a Santi Cazorla free-kick. Coming up in the last 15 minutes is a test of Liverpool's bottle.
73min: Arsenal haven't given this up just yet. They've improved since pulling a goal back but from 30 yards out Santi Cazorla fires well over the crossbar.
70min: This pitch is becoming a war zone for the players. Now Philippe Coutinho has pulled up with a hamstring problem and he is replaced by Emre Can.
67min: Final change from Arsenal as Granit Xhaka comes off the bench for his debut as he replaces Mohamed Elneny.
64min: This game has gone insane - ridiculous even. Having been on the ropes since the start of the second half, Arsenal have come out swinging again as Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain cuts inside from the left before his deflected strike creeps in at the near post. Game on?
63min: Utter disbelief in the Emirates Stadium but this is some goal by Sadio Mane! The forward on his debut cuts inside from the right with stunning pace before firing a strike across goal and into the top corner.
61min: And it gets worse for Arsenal. Now Aaron Ramsey is going off injured as he is replaced by Santi Cazorla.
59min: What is going on with Arsenal. They may not have a worse 15 minutes all season and I don't say that lightly. Only a smart Petr Cech save denies Coutinho before Lallana diverts the rebound wide... somehow.
It gets worse for the Gunners as Alex Iwobi is forced off injured as he is replaced by Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain.
56min: Since my last text update it's like Arsenal have collapsed. Nathaniel Clyne charges towards the right byline before his low cross is fired past Petr Cech from close range by Philippe Coutinho. What a turnaround in this game!
52min: So delighted was Jurgen Klopp following that Adam Lallana goal, his glasses fell on the pitch while he was celebrating wildly. How on earth Liverpool are in front I don't know but Arsenal are already presing looking to hit an equaliser
49min: Wow, what a start  to the half for Liverpool! Georginio Wijnaldum floats a cross towards the back post, and Adam Lallana's first touch allows him to chest the ball down in space before he slides a cool finish past Petr Cech. Brilliantly taken goal from the England midfielder.
7 - Arsenal v Liverpool has seen more penalties missed than any other fixture in @premierleague history (7). Misfire.
Not a great first half for either side's furthest man forward. Alexis Sanchez hasn't really had the service from his midfield, while Roberto Firmino is struggling for space to play in.
Arsenal looked good value for a half-time lead having created the majority of the openings and left Liverpool's defence a little rattled.
Liverpool by contrast struggled to test a green Arsenal centre-back pairing, but they are level following a sublime free-kick from Philippe Countinho - who could open a tin of beans with that right foot.
45+1min: Unstoppable! Liverpool win a free-kick 25 yards out following a Rob Holding foul, and sending the ball straight into the top corner is Philippe Coutinho. Petr Cech had no chance!
44min: Plenty of question marks over this Arsenal line-up but they have been the better side. Every Gunners break forward has Liverpool defending in panic as Jordan Henderson is penalised for tripping Alex Iwobi.
41min: Good move from Liverpool as they break forward but Philippe Coutinho's cut-back for Georginio Wijnaldum results in the midfielder's low shot across goal being saved by Petr Cech.
Meanwhile Dejan Lovren is booked following a foul - Liverpool's third of the match already.
38min: Francis Coquelin collects his token booking following a foul as Arsenal continue to look the better team.
35min: Slightly better from Liverpool but Roberto Firmino's speculative shot is well off target.
34min: Rather than sting Liverpool into life, that goal has lifted Arsenal who are now pressing for a second goal. With Moreno now identified as a weak link - I wouldn't be surprised to see more attacks down the right from the Gunners.
31min: But the reprieve doesn't last long and again Moreno is again at fault! Theo Walcott takes the ball on the right on the edge of the box before he drills low across target and into the bottom corner. - just 68 seconds after missing a penalty.
29min: Theo Walcott takes the kick but his rising effort to the left is beaten away by Simon Mignolet. What a let-off for Liverpool...
Ridiculous from Moreno - he's already made one bad challenge now he makes another after chopping down Theo Walcott in the box for a certain penalty - as well as being booked.
26min: Reckless from Adam Lallana who follows through the ankles with a challenge on Aaron Ramsey to pick up the game's first yellow card.
25min: Chance for Liverpool. Adam Lallana's tidy pass into the box picks out Roberto Firmino, whose blocked shot across goal just evades the charging Sadio Mane.
22min: Theo Walcott is furious and you can see why. The forward had made a central run ahead of a potential Aaron Ramsey through ball, but the Welshman instead chooses to shoot from 45 yards in an attempt to lob Simon Mignolet who was off his line.
It never looked like going in and Walcott lets fly a verbal tirade at his team-mate in disgust.
17min: Arsenal taking control again. Liverpool like to play out of defence but the passes are not sticking so far for the Reds (in black)  and Arsene Wenger will be the much happier manager at this stage.
14min: Alberto Moreno has been rather exposed at left-back in his LIverpool career. Aaron Ramsey sneaks in behind to collect a pass inside the box but a poor touch from the Welshman allows Moreno to slide in and put the ball behind for a corner.
Even the sliding tackle to concede a corner looked a little dangerous with two feet - even if he did play the ball as clean as a whistle.
12min: Liverpool are finally starting to show confidence on the ball now as they register a shot on target, with Nathaniel Clyne's low effort hit powerfully enough but straight at Petr Cech.
9min: Arsenal remain the more dangerous team in the opening stages of this game. Liverpool by contrast are trying to probe the right hand side with Sadio Mane but are not finding much success with it.
6min: So how is Arsenal's makeshift defence holding up? Well it hasn't been tested because Arsenal are doing the majority of the attacking.
The Gunners should be ahead a Aaron Ramsey collects the ball inside the box but his snap shot is straight at Simon Mignolet.
3min: I've seen those go wrong many times. Simon Mignolet controls a backpass under pressure from Alexis Sanchez, but rather than kicking the ball away he drops a shoulder to perform a turn.
Credit to the Liverpool keeper who dealt with the situation well before eventually clearing his lines.
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more.
I always find August meetings between two heavyweights are too early in the season, but out come the players anyway with Liverpool wearing their black change kit.
🎥 We're ready for #AFCvLFC, are you?
👻 Add 'LFC' on Snapchat for more behind-the-scenes footage from the Emirates. pic.twitter.com/PV1sRKVV6O
41 - Liverpool have scored more @premierleague goals than any other team in 2016 so far (41). Clinical. pic.twitter.com/fvPz4cZREU
The boys are warming up - and you can watch them LIVE right here 👉 https://t.co/C8ziQFZeMX pic.twitter.com/zcump8bzMZ
JOE BERNSTEIN: Jurgen Klopp flashes that famous smile as he reveals his masterplan to deliver Liverpool's first league title for 27 seasons.
'The best way is to start perfect, be fantastic in the middle and then have a world class finish,' he laughs, teeth bared for the new season.
It won't be that simple of course. With Manchester United breaking £100million for one player and Manchester City showing off a £50m centre-back, Liverpool won't be champions by cash alone.
CLICK HERE for more from the Liverpool manager.
With Per Mertesacker and Gabriel injured, and Laurent Koscielny not yet ready to play after Euro 2016, Arsene Wenger has decided to give Rob Holding his Premier League debut.
The 20-year-old defender, who joined the club from Bolton this summer, starts alongside Calum Chambers in the centre of defence against Jurgen Klopp's side.
Olivier Giroud also misses out, with new boy Granit Xhaka only on the bench.
Liverpool starting XI: Mignolet, Clyne, Lovren, Klavan, Moreno, Wijnaldum, Henderson, Lallana, Coutinho, Mane, Firmino
Subs: Manninger, Can, Matip, Origi, Stewart, Grujic, Alexander-Arnold
The #LFC squad for today's meeting with @Arsenal in full #AFCvLFC pic.twitter.com/Nk9gsnPwuy
Arsenal starting XI: Cech, Bellerin, Holding, Chambers, Monreal, Elneny, Coquelin, Walcott, Ramsey, Iwobi, Sanchez
Subs: Ospina, Gibbs, Wilshere, Xhaka, Cazorla, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Akpom
For the first time this @PremierLeague season, here is your @Arsenal team… #AFCvLFC pic.twitter.com/7iOhcQrpsx
...and welcome to Sportsmail's live coverage of Arsenal's Premier League clash with Liverpool at the Emirates.
Team news coming up in just a second.
Follow Sportsmail's coverage of the Premier League as Arsenal host Liverpool at the Emirates Stadium in a huge clash to continue the opening weekend of the season.
Arsene Wenger's side will be hoping to go one better than last season's runners-up finish to Leicester City in their bid for a first title since 2004.
But the Gunners have been given a tough start as they host a Jurgen Klopp side who at least have eyes on a top four finish this season.