ALLEN — The Tom Thumb Texas Stampede returned to Allen for the second year this weekend, bringing thousands to the Allen Event Center for the three-day concert, rodeo and western festival.
While definitive attendance figures are not yet available, turnout is believed to be higher than last year's event, said Scott Farace, vice president of the Texas Stampede.
By Farace's estimation, turnout for the rodeo was up 20 percent, with attendance for Friday night's performance — this year featuring country musician Josh Turner — up 33 percent and attendance for Saturday's performance — featuring Joe Nichols — up 25 percent.
"[This year's performers] did great," Farace said. "We were, for the most part, sold out Friday night. I think we ended with maybe 20 or 50 tickets left to sell and that was it."
Tim Dentler, director of parks and recreation, also noted the increase in attendance over last year.
"We always look at the boost to the local economy," Dentler said. "I have to believe it had a positive impact there with hotel nights and people going to the restaurants and all of those things. We were very pleased with the turnout, and the overall functionality of the site worked very well this year."
The Stampede celebrates its 10th anniversary this year. Until last year, which was the Stampede's first in Allen, the event was held at American Airlines Center in Dallas.
The move to Allen, Farace said, has seen the event take on a more family-oriented atmosphere, with new additions last year such as the kid-friendly Rodeo U area and expansion of the western marketplace and heritage festival.
"We've never had the festival or the kids' activities to the degree that we're doing now, and I think that helps attract a lot of families out there," he said. "That's the full experience of part of what our message is, which is to keep western heritage in Dallas alive. We bring a little bit of that back by having that festival, and it allows families in North Texas to come out and enjoy a weekend of that on top of seeing world-class rodeo and great concerts."
One aspect of the Stampede new to this year is the addition of another charitable partner benefiting from the event, McKinney-based River Ranch Educational Charities. In addition, the marketplace was given a holiday overhaul and renamed the Texas Stampede Christmas Marketplace.
"I think we got a fabulous response," Farace said. "We had the kids activities intermixed with everything, so mom and dad could go do a little shopping while the kids were playing, doing some of the games. Probably the most popular thing we do is the mutton busting event, where the kids get to ride the sheep around in the arena."
Allen resident Jim Waldbauer attended the rodeo for the second year on Saturday. He described the event as a "high-class effort" with a high-energy crowd, and said he encountered a surprising number of people from around the greater North Texas area and even Oklahoma.
"It was really good to see quite a regional crowd there," he said.
Last year, the event saw an estimated 20,000 people come out for the event's various attractions. Because some of the outdoor events were compromised by bad weather last year, the decision was made to move Rodeo U inside the community rink, though other events, such as pony rides, remained outside.
"Things have been going really well and we'll probably just be tweaking some things for next year," Farace said. "Coming out of last year, I knew right away that we would do a better job of moving stuff into the community rink. This year we did that and I think it went really well."