Eighteen years and 141 days. Marcus Rashford is the youngest goalscorer in the history of Manchester derbies – all 171 of them.
What a remarkable debut season this has been for the teenager. On Sunday, his 16th minute intervention – cool as you like – was all that stood between these teams, breathing life into Manchester United's bid to qualify for next season's Champions League. He may even save Louis Van Gaal's job in the process.
A point now separates three teams jostling for fourth place – Manchester City, West Ham and Manchester United. Van Gaal's team are placed third in that mini group but will take tremendous heart from this.
For Manchester City that's very much a bad thing. Their latest defeat at the Etihad Stadium sees them surely drop out the title race and it puts them in huge danger of dropping out the top four.
West Ham and Manchester United cam smell blood as both linger just a point behind Manuel Pellegrini's struggling outfit.
That's all from me here, I'll leave you with the top of the table, with all the fall-out to come on the homepage. Cheerio.
5 - Man City have lost as many home league games this season as they had in their previous four campaigns combined. Falter.
90+4min: A wry smile from Bony who is penalised for pushing Smalling to ground inside the United box. The Manchester United defender is lucky to still be on the field but he has been key to keeping the City strikers quiet, especially in this second half.
90+1min: There will be SIX added minutes for Manchester City to find an equaliser, unfortunately for them they will need at least six more days to find a goal as although Aguero controls a ball inside the box well enough, he fires wide of the near post.
88min: It's what should be a tense period in this game but I just cannot see Manchester City scoring - even if this game continued on until Tuesday.
Not long left for manchester United to hang on - even if Rashford, Michael Carrick and Anthony Martial are all struggling with cramp.
85min: More penalty appeals for Manchester United, this one isn't as strong as the one for Rashford in the first period though as Anthony Martial appears to run into emergency centre-back Fernandinho. Waving play on is for once the correct call by the referee.
83min: Much to the frustration of the City fans, Matteo Darmian has gone down with cramp. Typically it's on the far side of the field as he is then replaced by Timothy Fosu-Mensah in United's final switch.
81min: It says much about Manchester City's attack that despite having had 23 shots on goal as opposed to Manchester United's five, the visitors have still had more on target.
As time ticks away, it's hard to see how the hosts can break down this United side.
78min: A let off for Smalling, a BIG let off, his trip on Aguero is a rather blatant one 30 yards out but Michael Oliver opts against giving the Manchester United defender a second yellow card.
77min: Into the ref's book goes Eliaquim Mangala following a rather reckless lunge on Jesse Lingard. No complaints from anyone there regarding the referee's course of action.
75min: It's all Manchester City in this half, but their finishing is off colour this afternoon as Navas drills over the bar from the edge of the box.
72min: Finally the Manchester City players and fans are coming to life. Chants of 'come on City' ring round the ground after the hosts again go close to an equaliser.
Agiuero's far post header finds Toure across goal, whose cut-back for Bony results in the striker's close range finish being crucially blocked behind for a corner.
70min: Ditto Aguero. The striker spotting a small window to shoot in but can only blast over the bar from 25 yards.
Here comes Schweinsteiger as Juan Mata departs.
69min: More changes on the way for Manchester United as Bastian Schweinsteiger is getting stripped down ready to come on.
On the pitch, Gael Clichy fires wildly wide of the target from distance.
66min: Off the post! Yaya Toure cross from the right and while Aguero just about beats his marker to win a header, he can only guide his finish off the woodwork and out for a goal kick.
63min: First change for Manchester United as Valencia comes on in place of Rojo. Manchester United continue to sit off the hosts as they attempt to protect this lead.
62min: Good build up play from the hosts and that's got the home fans going as Bony, David Silva, and Yaya Toure combine before the striker's shot cannons off the latter, allowing Chris Smalling to clear.
59min: After the Manchester City changes, this half feels like it has had a stuttering start but the hosts are building slight momentum.
Manchester United boss Louis van Gaal hasn't let it pass him by as he prepares to send on Antonio Valencia.
56min: Caballero is straight to work too, pushing away a low drive across goal from compatriot Marcos Rojo following a Manchester United break.
53min: And now Demichelis is being put out his misery, the defender has endured a torrid afternoon and in Manuel Pellegrini's final switch he has been replaced by Wilfried Bony.
50min: In fact Hart has to go off, he is being carried away on a stretcher as Willy Caballero replaces him.
There is a big cheer for the Argentine's arrival following his heroics in helping City win the Capital One Cup last month.
48min: What a nightmare this is turning into for Manchester City and Demichelis. The centre-back gives Joe Hart a nightmare backpass, which results in the keeper having to slide in front of Anthony Martial to clear the ball.
The problem now is the England keeper has stayed down and needs treatment on the field.
Jermain Defoe proved earlier that you don't have to see much of th ball to still have a massive impact on the first half.
And Marcus Rashford has continued that trend. His two main attacks have resulted in him leaving Martin Demichelis trailing on both occasions and it's clear the veteran Argentine just cannot handle the teenager's agility.
Here is Rashford's heat map from the first period.
While I thought City had claims for a penalty at one end, there is no doubt that Manchester United's appeal moment later was much stronger.
Demichelis has escaped giving away a spot-kick there and Manchester United have been denied the opportunity to go into this derby with a 2-0 scoreline.
Will it prove costly? Here is how the table stands at half-time.
45+1min: That is a penalty, an absolute blatant penalty and I cannot believe it hasn't been given.
Demichelis is beyond clumsy as he clatters into Rashofrd on the byline, but incredibly Michael Oliver ignores spot-kick appeals.
Rashford is furious as then squares up to the Argentine following the challenge.
45min: And from that free-kick, City should be level. The ball to the back post sees Toure fire wide off balance - with the midfielder complaining he was fouled by Michael Carrick.
There's also another case for a penalty as Smalling pulls back on the shirt - but he has somehow been getting away with fouls on set-pieces for a good few months now.
44min: What is Blind playing at? The Manchester United pushes Aguero not once but twice to concede a free-kick on the right.
41min: Minor injury concern for Manchester United but Daley Blind soon recovers after appeared to catch the stud of Aguero's boot while trying to clear the ball. That's where the action is I'm afraid folks.
38min: Still not much from either side in an attacking sense since the goal, I'm still surprised by how quiet it is inside the Etihad Stadium for a derby.
Maybe the passion shown by the North-East fans in the Tyne-Wear derby has raised a high bar - or maybe this game is being played at a very slow tempo.
35min: Navas has been Manchester City's best player in this half but not even he can get the hosts going as after cutting in from the right, his shot across goal is well off target.
32min: Well that's a little better from the hosts. Yaya Toure is capable of picking out a corner from distance and his left footed strike across goal from 25 yards drifts just wide past De Gea's post.
29min: You could forgive Manchester City for labouring against Dynamo Kiev midweek - it was a game where they didn't need to score.
But this has almost been a carbon copy performance from City. David de Gea has had nothing to do since the hosts fell behind. Where's the urgency from Manuel Pellegrini's team to get back into this?
26min: And off comes Sterling as he is replaced by Fernando. Very muted atmosphere inside the Etihad Stadium but in truth the home fans haven't had much to cheer at all.
25min: It's getting worse for Manchester City, Raheem Sterling doesn't look like he will continue as he is limping around carrying a knock following an earlier challenge from Juan Mata.
22min: And they should be level, David Silva's whipped ball to the far post is glanced just wide across goal by Demichelis.
21min: Injured Manchester City defender Vincent Kompany looks on with concern from inside the ground. Rashford did well of course but I wonder what the Belgian made of City's sloppy defending in the lead up to the goal.
On the pitch, the hosts win a free-kick 30 yards out to the left.
18y 141d - Marcus Rashford is the youngest scorer in a Manchester derby in Premier League history (18 years 141 days). Fledgling.
16min: I had concerns Marcus Rashford was playing too much, but that's why I'm sat here and Louis van Gaal is manager of Manchester United.
The striker takes the ball superbly past Martin Demichelis in one swoop, before calmly slotting past Joe Hart. It's against the run of play but what an impact this teenager has made in the last month or so!
15min: Navas alone is trying to bring something to this game but after collecting a pass at the back post he fires straight at David de Gea.
13min: Given the less than trusted pairing of Eliaquim Mangala and Martin Demichelis in the Manchester City defence, I'm surprised Manchester United haven't tried to attack more so far.
The City duo have had very little to do with the visitors lining up in a very conservative borderline cautions manner.
10min: You thought the Dnnamo Kiev game at the Etihad was bad in midweek, this isn't lagging too far behind.
A Navas cross and half-chance is about the only action we have seen as Chris Smalling is booked for pulling back on Sergio Aguero's shirt.
7min: That's woken a few up, including me. David Silva releases Raheem Sterling down the left, and while his cut-back doesn't find a team-mate, Manchester United fail to clear properly.
As a result, Navas collects a loose ball before firing just wide on the volley.
4min: Seems all the action was inside the 15 seconds. Not a peep from either side since as Manchester City control the ball but without much attacking purpose.
1min: In the first 15 seconds, Manchester City win a corner as Matteo Darmian turns behind a Jesus Navas corner at the far post.
The visitors eventually clear the resulting set-piece.
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more.
A huge day for both. Defeat for Manchester City and they can perhaps wave bye to the title, should Manchester United lose then a return to Champions League football next season looks as far away as ever for them.
Man City: Hart, Sagna, Demichelis, Mangala, Clichy, Toure, Fernandinho, Jesus Navas, Silva, Sterling, Aguero. Subs: Zabaleta, Fernando, Kolarov, Caballero, Bony, Iheanacho, Manu Garcia.
Man Utd: De Gea, Darmian, Smalling, Blind, Rojo, Carrick, Schneiderlin, Lingard, Mata, Martial, Rashford. Subs: Depay, Januzaj, Romero, Valencia, Fellaini, Schweinsteiger, Fosu-Mensah.
Hello and welcome to Sportsmail's live coverage of Manchester City vs Manchester United.
In year's gone by this would have been a title decider, but as things stand this season it is more about the battle for fourth place.
Follow Sportsmail's coverage of the Barclays Premier League as Manchester City host Manchester United at the Etihad Stadium to help conclude the weekend's action.
The Manchester derby at the Etihad Stadium sees both sides on the back foot in their domestic campaign, with City a huge 15 points behind league leaders Leicester City, while United trail their rivals, who hold the final Champions League spot, by four points.