Just the 30 penalties in the shootout - 27 of which were tucked away. Liverpool were pretty average in the 120 minutes and Middlesbrough were well worth the draw at the very least. And two more goals conceded from Brendan Rodgers' side. Or 15 if you count the penalties
That's it from me. Thanks for following the blog. Come back tomorrow for Spurs v Nottingham Forest.
ADOMAH MISSES AND LIVERPOOL WIN 14-13 ON PENALTIES. It's miles wide of the goal and this epic, and frankly bizarre, penalty shootout is finally at an end. Albert Adamoah was smiling and joking as he walked up to take the penalty as a mild hysteria came over the players on the pitch. He couldn't recover his composure and it was a poor end to an exhibition of penalty taking.
Goal! Suso scores. Liverpool 14 Middlesbrough 13.
Goal! Adam Reach scores. It's identical to his first effort. Liverpool 13 Middlesbrough 13.
Goal! Adam Lallana scores. This is officially insane. Liverpool 13 Middlesbrough 12.
Goal! Adam Clayton rolls it into the corner. Liverpool 12 Middlesbrough 12.
Goal! Lucas can barely run but he finds the net. Liverpool 12 Middlesbrough 11.
Goal! Patrick Bamford scores. It's his third penalty of the night. Liverpool 11 Middlesbrough 11.
Goal! Balotelli scores. Liverpool 11 Middlesbrough 10.
Goal! Blackman scores. Liverpool 10 Middlesbrough 10. And we're back to the start again. Here comes Mario.
Goal! Mignolet scores. Liverpool 10 Middlesbrough 9.
Goal! Wildschut scores. Liverpool 9 Middlesbrough 9. That's the full compliment of outfield players. Here comes the keepers ...
Goal! Jose Enrique scores. Liverpool 9 Middlesbrough 8.
Goal! Omeruo scores. Liverpool 8 Middlesbrough 8.
Goal! Manquillo scores. Liverpool 8 Middlesbrough 7.
Goal! Fredericks scores. Just. Mignolet gets a hand to it. Liverpool 7 Middlesbrough 7.
Goal! Sakho slots it into the corner. Liverpool 7 Middlesbrough 6.
Goal! Daniel Ayala scores. Liverpool 6 Middlesbrough 6. Will this ever end?
Goal! Kolo Toure scores. Liverpool 6 Middlesbrough 5.
Goal! George Friend rolls it in. Liverpool 5 Middlesbrough 5.
Goal! Jordan Williams scores on his debut. Liverpool 5 Middlesbrough 4.
Vossen must score ... he does. Sends Mignolet the wrong way. Liverpool 4 Middlesbrough 4.
Raheem Sterling can win it .... he misses. Saved by Blackman. Poor penalty.  Liverpool 4 Middlesbrough 3.
Goal! Adomah must score and he does, in style. Liverpool 4 Middlesbrough 3.
Goal! Suso goes down the middle. Liverpool 4 Middlesbrough 2.
Goal! Adam Reach plants it in the top corner. Great penalty. Liverpool 3 Middlesbrough 2.
Goal! Lallana sends Blackman the wrong way. Liverpool 3 Middlesbrough 1.
Goal! Adam Clayton scores. Liverpool 2 Middlesbrough 1.
Goal! Lucas scores. Great penalty. Liverpool 2 Middlesbrough 0.
Patrick Bamford misses. Saved by Mignolet. Poor penalty. Liverpool 1 Middlesbrough 0
Goal! Mario Balotelli scores. Liverpool 1 Middlesbrough 0
The penalties are going to be at the Kop end. Mario Balotelli will take first.
Full time: Liverpool 2 Middlesbrough 2. Penalties it is. How did Liverpool throw that away? It was a really, really poor pass from Sterling which gave Bamford the chance to burst into the area but Toure has got to try and guide him away from goal rather than bundle him to the ground.
GOAL! Liverpool 2 Middlesbrough 2 (Bamford 120) Patrick Bamford strolls up and sends Mignolet the wrong way and earns the right to take another penalty in a couple of minutes.
120+1 min: Penalty to Middlesbrough. Kolo Toure at his best with a tackle on Bamford which is beyond idiotic. It was Sterling who had lost possession but Toure compunded the error as the Boro man burst into the area.
120 min: Two minutes of stoppage time. Lucas is down with cramp and Mignolet boots the ball out of play.
118 min: Liverpool are playing keepball now. If they can get another 80 seconds or so of it they'll be through to the next round. As it is they lose the ball but nearly get a third. Manquillo picks out Suso with a crossfield pass. Suso weaves into the area and firest a right footed shot which Blacman beats away.
115 min: Nice play from Bamford on the right but he can't pick out Adomah. Liverpool counter and Fredericks dumps Sterling on the deck. The last think Liverpool need now is an injury to Sterling. I think he's OK.
113 min: Sterling and Suso combine on the left and the Spaniard wins a corner. Liverpool are trying to run down the clock now. Something they don't do very effeciently as Lallana knocks it out for a throw.
111 min: Aitor Karanka is going to make a double change: Bamford and Vossen come on for Leadbitter and Tomlin, both of whom have been excellent.
GOAL! Liverpool 2 Middlesbrough 1 (Suso 108) The goal has been coming. Liverpool have flown out of the blocks in this half. It's lovely link up between Enrique and Lallana on the left. The cross takes a deflection which nearly falls to Balotelli. Friend makes a great last-ditch clearance to deny the Italian but can only play it into Suso's path and he rifles a low right footed shot under Blackman from the penalty spot.
107 min: Good save from Blackman who blocks Enrique's angled drive. He's called into action moments later as Sterling lets fly from a similar position to the earlier shot. This time it goes to the near post and Blackman claws it away for a corner.
106 min: Yellow card for Adam Reach for chopping down Manquillo who was on the charge.
Peep! Midlesbrough get the second period of extra time underway.
Half time: Liverpool 1 Middlesbrough 1. T-minutes 15 minutes to penalties.
105 min: A half-chance for Suso after Lallana's cross rebounds to Balotelli's The Italian's lay-off isn't great and Suso can't get the control he needs on the shot.
104 min: Liverpool have been better since Suso came on - he's linked up well with Lallana. He works an opening at the edge of the area but his shot is blocked.
102 min: The cross is deep - too deep - and Mignolet punches clear.
101 min: Lallana does well on the right but can't pick out Balotelli in the centre. Boro counter and Manquillo bundles over Reach and now Leadbitter will have another chance to fire a free kick into the area.
97 min: For a minute it opens up for Markovic at the edge of the Boro area but instead of shooting he tries to weave into the box and is tackled. It's the Serbian's last contribution to a poor performance as Suso comes on.
95 min: Free kick to Boro on the right ... It's pumped towards Friend at the back post. He nods it back into the danger zone. It's unconvincing from Liverpool but they get it clear. Friend first it back into the area and Mignolet comes and is fouled by Ayala as he punches clear.
94 min: Liverpool are dominating territory but one big punt forward later Wildschut is bearing down on Toure who is Liverpool's last man. Toure does well on this occassion to dispossess the Boro sub.
91 min: Corner to liverpool as Sterling bursts onto Manquillo's pass. They work it short. Sterling dinks in a cross which Lucas meets on the half-volley and it's blocked behind for another corner.
Peep! We're underway in extra time. No changes at the end of full time. Hands up who wants penalties?
Some thoughts. It's only two weeks since Brendan Rodgers spoke of the need to be careful with Raheem Sterling after his performances for England and rested him for a home game with Aston Villa. A game which Liverpool lost. Now he's heading into extra time a few days before a really vital game for Rodgers and Liverpool's season - a derby against Everton.
Full time: Livepool 1 Middlesbrough 1. We're going to extra time.
90+2 min: Big penalty appeal for Liverpool as the otherwise impecable Ayala misjudges Sterling's cross and the ball comes off his hand. I think that's a penalty. Mike Jones doesn't.
90+1 min: Sterling picks out Balotelli who tries a riduculously ambitious backheel and unsurprisingly it doersn't come off.
90 min: Three minutes of stoppage time. Boro on the attack but Leadbitter gives away a free kick and Liverpool can clear.
87 min: One corner could win it now for Boro. They have a throw which is nearly as good. Toure flicks it on inadvertantly but it sails over Adomah's head.
84 min: It should be 2-1 to Middlesbrough. It's a brilliant foray forward from Friend who makes up 50 yards before playing it to Tomlin. There seems to be nothing on but he picks out a run from Clayton with a disguised pass but the midfielder crashes his shot against the side netting from a tight angle. It may have even hit the outside of the post.
81 min: Manquillo fires a half-volley from distance which is miles wide and only really sums up the lack of penetration in this Liverpool side.
79 min: Lallana hits the deck after a heavy challenge which goes unpunished and Boro counter and try to win a corner but Mignolet gathers the cross.
78 min: A second Liverpool change and it's 18-year-old Jordan Williams who replaces Liverpool's goalscorer Jordan Rossiter.
76 min: What a challenge from Kolo Toure. Clayton brings a full-length save from Mignolet with a powerful shot from distance. Tomlin is arriving to fire the rebound back at goal but the Liverpool defender sticks out a leg and clears the danger.
75 min: Boro make a change: Yanic Wildschut comes on for Kike.
74 min: Balotelli is on for Rickie Lambert.
73 min: Liverpool are piling on the pressure now as Lallana again shows some trickery to tee up Markovic who tries to Teddy Sheringham it to Sterling but the pass is poor and Reach knocks it behind for a corner.
72 min: Lallana wants a penalty as he twists and turns Fredericks. Mike Jones takes a long loot at it but decides against pointing to the spot.
71 min: Sterling again looks the most likely Liverpool player to do something (and the one the others are looking to). he gets around the outside on the right but can't pick out Lambert.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Henry Winter - Adam Reach has been good all night for &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23boro" target="_blank"&gt;#boro&lt;/a&gt;, making some great left-footed passes, now equalises with a header from Leadbitter fk. 1-1.&lt;/noframe&gt;
68 min: Manquillo tries a Nayim from the halfway line (accidentally) but Blackman is able to save. And here comes Mario ...
67 min: Adomah does well on the right to twist Enrique one wy and another before digging out a cross which is just too high for Reach to get any real power on his header.
65 min: Sloppy defending from Middlesbrough and Markovic pounces, moving into the inside right position but his cross is really, really poor.
64 min: Sterling tries a shot from distance but it lacks power. Meanwhile Borini and Balotelli start to warm up.
GOAL! Liverpool 1 Middlesbrough 1 (Reach 62) Liverpool concede from a set piece (yet again). It's another lovely ball from Leadbitter who fires in from the right corner of the penalty area. Adam Reach loses his marker Lambert and powers a header past Mignolet from close range.
61 min: Yellow card for Sakho for a handball from Fredericks' cross. This is a dangerous area.
60 min: Sterling again launches a counter, playing the ball to Lambert who realls needs to play in Manquillo who is scampering down the right. Insstead he tries a Hollywood crossfield ball but it's more like a James Cordon film and Blackman gathers.
57 min: Lallana has shown brief glimpses of the player who was so effective for Southampton last season. He cuts inside from the left and shapes to shoot, but loses his footing (not for the first time tonight) and it's an easy save by Blackman.
56 min: First yellow card of the game and it's shown to Imeruo for a bodcheck on Lallana who was trying to skip past the Boro man.
53 min: Lovely turn from Sterling, who has faded a little since his bright opening, but hasn't got injured which is the main thing for Liverpool. Fredericks does will to dispossess Sterling and then prevent the ball going for a corner.
51 min: Nice play from Fredericks onthe right. He tees up Leadbitter but his shot from distance is poor.
49 min: Corner to Liverpool. Lallana takes from the right. Toure is arriving at the penalty spot but crashes to the ground. It's a clumsy challenge from Ameruo who bundles the Liverpool man to the ground as he jumped. That should be a penalty.
46 min: Bright start from Boro and the excellent Tomlin. He skips inside Lucas and lets fly from distance. It's never really threatening Mignolet's goal but it's another warning sign that Liverpool will need to up their level if they want to progress.
Peep! We're back underway at Anfield. No changes on either side.
Half time: Liverpool 1 Middlesbrough 0. Jordan Rossiter's goal separates the sides. The game as a whole is not quite on this level ...
44 min: Markovic has a chance to show what he can do after an exchange of passes with Manquillo. he runs straight at the defender and then away from the ball leaving Imeruo with an easy clearance. I'm beginning to get the feeling that that may be what Markovic does best.
41 min: Liverpool have taken the sting out of the game a bit now after that decent spell from Boro. Jose Enrique comes to life on the left and pings in a cross which Ayala toes away.
37 min: Great effort from Tomlin and a big save from Mignolet. Again it's from a half-cleared corner. Tomlin controls with his chest and fires a swerving shot from 25 yards which goes through a host of bodies and the Liverpool 'keeper does well to beat away. Adomah again can't make the most of the rebound. Good spell for Middlesbrough.
35 min: Lee Tomlin has been by far the pick of Boro's players so far. He weaves past Lucas and Lallana on the right. he scuffs his shot somewhat but it comes off Sakho into Kike's path. Mignolet comes out and clawas away and it's scrambled behind for a corner as Adomah tries to fire the rebound goalwards.
31 min: So corners are Liverpool's Kryptonite. We should probably get used to that.
29 min: Corner to Middlesbrough after Kike pounces on a loose ball from Rossiter. It's nother good ball from leadbitter towards Kike who catches it nicely on the volley. It deflects off Lambert and behind for a corner. Sakho manages to head this one clear.
26 min: "All clear for Operation Anfield Exercise," says the man on the tannoy. I think it was something to do with Kolo Toure.
24 min: Adam Lallana, another whose Liverpool career has yet to get going, spins nicely to open up a bit of space for himself but he drags his shot wide from just outside the area.
23 min: Some vintage Kolo Toure on a display here. A few minutes ago he played a pass that would give all aimless passes a bad name and now he's volleyed straight into touch while under no pressure at all. They can't score from there, I suppose.
21 min: "Standby for Operation Anfield Exercise," says the man on the tannoy. This should be good.
17 min: If Rossiter needs an example of someone who can come from nowehere to being an essential part of this Liverpool team in no time at all he can look at Raheem Sterling. It's Sterling who is at the centre of a swift counter with lovely bit of skill and pass towards Markovic, a player who desperately needs to show that he has any redeeming features. It's not going to happen now as Ayala gets across and deals with the danger.
14 min: Rossiter's 'telling people what to do' has been a feature of the game so far. he could teach Robbie Keane a thing or two about pointing.
12 min: Sterling pings a ball towards Lambert in the inside left position. Fredereicks should get across to sweep up the danger but Lambert robs him of the ball and nearly gets in but Ayala comes scross to clean up.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Simon Hughes - Rossiter. Trained with the first team for the first time 18 months ago. Told that in his first session, he was telling everyone what to do.&lt;/noframe&gt;
GOAL! Liverpool 1 Middlesbrough 0 (Rossiter 9) The 17-year-old has a goal inside 10 minutes of his debut. It's chaos in the Boro defence as Omeruo and goalkeeper Blackman get in each other's way. It's half-cleared as far as Lambert who shoots first time. Blackman makes a decent save to block with his legs but the ball rebounds to Rossiter 25 yards out. He hits a low shot which Blackman attempts to block with his foot for some unknown reason, misses it completely and the ball rolls into the empty net. What a start to Rossiter's career.
8 min: Tomlin has been a feature of Middlesbrough’s neat play so far. He finds space between Liverpool’s midfield and defence and threads a pass through to Kike who may just be offside. The flag stays down and his cutback and knocked behind for a corner. Leadbitter whips it in, Ayala rises and gets a clean header but Mignolet gathers.
John McEnerney writes: "A top four finish is top of BR's agenda but I'd say winning a cup is pretty close too, they have a better chance of winning a cup than the CL or PL. The sooner the better they're out of Europe and focus on things at home and get themselves ready for a title challenge next season!"
Agree/Disagree? Is the title challenge dead already?
4 min: The lively start to the game continues as Toure advances into the Boro half and threads a pass to Manquillo on the right. He fires across the area with his first touch. Lallana steps over in the hope and/or belief that Lambert is arriving behind him but his former Southampton team-mate isn’t as advanced as he’d hoped and the move comes to an end. 4 min: The lively start to the game continues as Toure advances into the Boro half and threads a pass to Manquillo on the right. He fires across the area with his first touch. Lallana steps over in the hope and/or belief that Lambert is arriving behind him but his former Southampton team-mate isn’t as advanced as he’d hoped and the move comes to an end.
2 min: Good fightback from the visitors. Grant Leadbitter swings in a free kick and Sakho heads ouyt for a throw on the far side. Boro keep the pressure on and Kike heads over from Tomlin's cross.
1 min: Raheem Sterling goes straight at the Boro defence and Ayala is forced to give away a corner. Lallana's delivery isn't great and it crashes into Kike's chest. The crowd makes some appeals for a handball but the referee ain't bothered and the Boro forward boots clear.
Peep! Mike Jones gets the game underway. Or he blows his whistle at least. Lambert and Lallana get the ball rolling.
19.42 The teams come out onto the pitch with Rickie Lambert leading Liverpool out at Anfield while the Middlesbrough players wearing t-shirts with the words "Get well soon Damia" in honour of defender Damia Abella who suffered a serious knee injury against Cardiff last week.
19.36 Some housekeeping. This will go to extra-time and penalties if needed.
19.30 My colleague Huw Turbervill has some thoughts on the starting line up. Take it away, Huw ... "That line-up is pretty much what I was expecting. Rossiter selection harsh on Suso, though."
One thing has suprised Huw, however, and that's the inclusion of Raheem Sterling who you might have thought would be wrapped in cotton wool, or an extraordinarily large set of headphones at the very least, ahead of Saturday's Merseyside derby. "Borini is more expendable," says Huw.
19.20 Here are some Jordan Rossiter skillz and/or pragmatic passes from an under-21 game against Manchester United last year. he becomes the eighth youngest player in Liverpool's history. Can you name the other seven? No cheating.
19.00 Good evening people and welcome to live coverage of Liverpool versus Middlesbrough in the third round of the Capital One Cup, the competition the FA Cup wishes it was.
Regardless of tonight's result this has already been a momentous day for Liverpool with planning permission finally granted for the expansion of Anfield.
What this means - apart from Liverpool's corresponding fixture three years from now being played in front of even more empty seats than tonight's - is that a tourtous process involving a series of meaningless architects drawings that may as well have been produced by Art Vandelay and lots of vague promises about "spades in the ground within 60 days" is finally coming to an end.
In-form Middlesbrough lie in wait for Brendan Rodgers' side, who desperately need an impressive performance to change the mood around the club which is hovering dangerously close to the 'crisis' zone. With that in mind Rodgers has selected a pretty strong team for tonight's game, but has handed a first start to Rickie Lambert, who also is named captain for the night, and a competetive debut to Jordan Rossiter.
For 'Boro former Liverpool defender Daniel Ayala gets a start while Patrick Bamford is on the bench. Jamal Blackman is handed a start in goals while Kike comes into the starting XI.
Liverpool: Mignolet; Manquillo, Toure, Sakho, Enrique; Lucas, Rossiter, Lallana; Sterling, Lambert, Markovic.  Subs: Jones, Moreno, Borini, Suso, Skrtel, Balotelli, Williams.
Middlesbrough: Blackman; Fredericks, Ayala, Omeruo, Friend; Adomah, Leadbitter, Clayton, Reach; Tomlin, Kike. Subs: Dimi, Husband, Gibson, Nsue, Vossen, Bamford, Wildschut.
14.15 Good afternoon. It's everyone's favourite time of the week - Capital One Cup time. What's that, you didn't realise it was happening tonight? You're not the only one.
But here we are and this is football. It's not-doing-very-well-in-the-Premier-League Liverpool against doing-fairly-well in the Championship Middlesbrough.
Evan Fanning will be the man in the live-blogging hotseat this evening. Before then have a read of our comprehensive match preview by clicking on this WORD. Or have a chuckle looking through the Twitter timeline of the Rodgers Out Club (they don't like the Liverpool manager) by clicking on this WORD.