So there is no curse of Selhurst Park and meeting Crystal Palace in the FA Cup holds no special fear for Liverpool.
Having quieted one unhappy spirit from a past life by beating AFC Wimbledon in January, Liverpool returned to south London on Saturday evening, to the venue where their title hopes disintegrated last season, to face the team which still celebrates beating them 4-3 in an FA Cup semi-final in 1990.
Ultimately they prevailed but not without the odd scare. Liverpool are not yet so strong and confident in themselves that they can dismiss the superstition surrounding a jinxed team with the authority of an assured sceptic. After all, they lost 3-1 here only in November.
Liverpool striker Daniel Sturridge is joined in his famous dance by his team-mate Alberto Moreno (right)
Sturridge struck just after half time to draw Liverpool level after Crystal Palace's opener after 15 minutes
Adam Lallana (front) celebrates with team-mate Martin Skrtel after putting Liverpool 2-1 ahead in the fifth round FA Cup clash
Crystal Palace: Speroni 7, Kelly 6.5 (Guedioura 64, 6), Hangeland 6.5, Dann 7, Souare 6.5, Bolasie 6 (Zaha 72, 6), Ward 6.5, Ledley 6.5, Gayle 6.5, Chamakh 7 (Puncheon 46, 6), Campbell 6.5
Subs not used: Hennessey, Mariappa, Murray, Delaney
Liverpool: Mignolet 7, Can 7.5, Skrtel 6.5, Sakho 6.5, Markovic 6 (Balotelli 46, 7), Allen 7, Henderson 8, Moreno 6.5, Lallana 7, Sturridge 7 (Lambert 78, 6), Coutinho 7.5 (Lovren 79, 6)
Subs not used: Ward, Johnson, Manquillo,  Borini
*Ratings by Sami Mokbel at Selhurst Park
But thanks to goals from Daniel Sturridge and Adam Lallana and notably an impressive second-half performance by Mario Balotelli, Liverpool progressed.
Having hit the winner against Tottenham and set up Lallana on Saturday, this was comfortably Balotelli’s best week since his return to England. Not saying much, perhaps, but there are at least glimmers he might make a longer term contribution to Liverpool.
For Brendan Rodgers though it was about exorcising the demons of Selhurst Park: not that infamous 3-3 draw last season, which he considers a mere footnote in their failure to win the title. It is the 3-1 defeat from earlier in the season which he feels represented a nadir. They have only lost once since then.
‘We were at a real low point at that time with players still trying to adapt to the pressures of playing at Liverpool and the expectancy,’ said the Liverpool manager. ‘I needed to find a way to make it work. We’d been playing 4-3-3 but it wasn’t working for us with key players out, so we had to arrest that negative momentum and get back the aggression and intensity with which the team had been playing.
‘After the game we had to have an intervention and we did that. It was ironic coming back here, getting the victory and putting in a real good performance. The players’ response from that moment has been incredible and hopefully we can continue to the end of the season.’
Liverpool though did not convince initially. Early on, Martin Skrtel was having one of those games where marshalling a back three looked a thankless task. Palace had space aplenty in which to drive and Skrtel was left exposed.
The opening goal came from his mistake in the 17th minute. Joe Ledley chipped in a teasing ball and the Liverpool defender neither met it, nor cleared it but simply allowed it to skim off his head to Dwight Gayle, who nodded it goalwards. Simon Mignolet smothered that effort but only cleared the ball to Fraizer Campbell, who drove it in.
started well, scored a goal with a ball over their back three, but that kind of hampered us,’ said Alan Pardew. ‘We got a bit too deep. I was desperate to get the team up the pitch a bit.’ Pardew was right that Palace sat back but they looked solid enough and Liverpool’s best efforts were limited in that first half.
Klopp says today's footballers aren't heavy drinkers
Man United 1-1 Arsenal: Jose Mourinho interview
Paul Pogba shares video of him and brothers dancing on Instagram
Man City's Pep Guardiolia discusses 2-1 win over Crystal Palace
The world's best goal celebrators Stjarnan FC walk the plank
'Find me' Zlatan Ibrahimovic enjoys drive through snow
Crystal Palace's Alan Pardew discusses 1-2  loss to Man City
Pep Guardiola denies Samir Nasri's sex ban claims
Chelsea manager Antonio Conte talks Diego Costa ahead of match
Mignolet and Liverpool players shown haka by NZ rugby league
Peter Kay jokes around on Strictly Come Dancing
Goodness gracious! Ed and Katya jive to 'Great Balls of Fire'
A masked Marouane Chamakh challenges Liverpool central midfielder Joe Allen (right) for the ball in the early stages
Liverpool's Mamadou Sakho (left) and Crystal Palace's Yannick Bolasie battle for the ball in the first half
Campbell (centre) slides one past Liverpool goalkeeper Mignolet to put Crystal Palace ahead after 15 minutes
Emre Can, Martin Skrtel and goalkeeper Simon Mignolet look on forlorn as they were beaten by Campbell's opener
Fraizer Campbell (left) celebrates with his Crystal Palace team-mate Dwight Gayle after putting his side in front against Liverpool
Liverpool captain Jordan Henderson and Martin Skrtel look dejected after falling behind in the game
Liverpool manager Brendan Rodgers watches on from the sidelines during the FA Cup fifth round clash
Crystal Palace midfielder Joe Ledley (left) in action against Liverpool striker Sturridge
‘WeThey felt they should have had a penalty when Senegalese debutant Pape Souare clumsily challenged Sturridge in the box in the 33rd minute. He probably got a toe to the ball but was taking a huge risk.
Lallana came close in the 22nd minute when fed by Jordan Henderson, forcing an excellent save from Julian Speroni. But Henderson, in the 30th minute, and Philippe Coutinho in the 39th, would also try their luck from longer distances but found Speroni no less alert.
The decisive moment of the match came in the 43rd minute with Skrtel again in a muddle, failing to clear and allowing the ball to ricochet off him towards Gayle. With just Mignolet to beat, Gayle shot low but saw his shot saved by the foot of the Liverpool keeper. ‘That turned out to be a pivotal moment,’ said Pardew. ‘We would have been very difficult to beat if that had gone in.’
Credit though to Rodgers. He was bold in bringing on Balotelli at half-time and playing two up front. And his team never tire of passing the ball, patiently nurturing their build-up until they found Henderson on the edge of the box.
Klopp says today's footballers aren't heavy drinkers
Man United 1-1 Arsenal: Jose Mourinho interview
Paul Pogba shares video of him and brothers dancing on Instagram
Man City's Pep Guardiolia discusses 2-1 win over Crystal Palace
The world's best goal celebrators Stjarnan FC walk the plank
'Find me' Zlatan Ibrahimovic enjoys drive through snow
Crystal Palace's Alan Pardew discusses 1-2  loss to Man City
Pep Guardiola denies Samir Nasri's sex ban claims
Chelsea manager Antonio Conte talks Diego Costa ahead of match
Mignolet and Liverpool players shown haka by NZ rugby league
Peter Kay jokes around on Strictly Come Dancing
Goodness gracious! Ed and Katya jive to 'Great Balls of Fire'
Crystal Palace goalscorer Campbell battles for posession with Liverpool winger Lazar Markovic (left)
Crystal Palace manager Alan Pardew gestures on the touchline at Selhurst Park
Liverpool striker Sturridge peels away in celebration after drawing Liverpool level early in the second half
Sturridge begins his trademark celebration dance solo before later being joined by his team-mate Moreno
He delivered a sublime dipping cross aimed at Sturridge. It was a lovely piece of skill but there was still much to do. Sturridge simply fixed his eyes on the ball and struck a low volley past Speroni, who should have kept it out but was beaten by the sheer speed of the striker’s reaction. For a man who has had five months out, Sturridge is finishing remarkably cleanly and consistently.
There was now undoubtedly a more confident swagger about the visitors and Balotelli seemed to pick up the vibe with his free-kick in the 58th minute.
With Skrtel as the decoy, he managed to drive it through the Palace wall forcing Speroni to parry it. First to the scene was the onrushing Lallana, who finished from close range to make it 2-1.
Palace endeavoured to come back at Liverpool. But with the cushion of a goal lead and able to sit deeper than before, Rodgers’ team afforded them less space and therefore fewer opportunities and ultimately they controlled the closing periods of the game.
Liverpool march on for now. Steven Gerrard is injured but his team-mates are keeping alive the prospect of a Wembley finale to his Liverpool career. And maybe that could prove the start of something for Balotelli and Liverpool.
Lallana then struck to put Liverpool ahead just before the hour mark against Crystal Palace in the fifth round clash
The Liverpool midfielder peels away in celebration after giving his side a 2-1 lead against Crystal Palace