Winston Churchill declared that Cincinnati was “the most beautiful inland city in America.” A trip to Cincinnati Christian University will serve to affirm this statement as vistas on campus offer beautiful and inspiring views of downtown. Nestled in the Price Hill community of Cincinnati, our urban location serves as an ideal location for both education and entertainment.
Cincinnati is the nation’s 27th largest metropolitan area, larger than the metro areas of Cleveland, Las Vegas, and Kansas City. Not only does the region boast a promising job market, it offers many amenities to its residents as well as to our students.
Athletics
In addition to CCU’s Golden Eagles Athletics, the city boasts numerous professional sports franchises. For a major league experience, catch the Reds or the Bengals or enjoy a game of one of our minor league franchises such as the hockey Cincinnati Cyclones, the baseball Florence Freedom, or the Cincinnati Saints soccer club.
Culinary
Even the most skeptical foodie can find a place to satisfy the palate. Whether it’s a newer place like Senate or Taste of Belgium, or it’s indulging in the Cincinnati staples (Skyline Chili, Graeter’s Ice Cream, LaRosa’s Pizza, or Montgomery Inn), there’s something in the city for everyone.
The city boasts a plethora of music venues, both large and small, which host national artists throughout the year. Check out Riverbend, Bogart’s, The 20th Century Theater, or Rohs Street Cafe.
The Arts
For almost two centuries, Cincinnati has had a national presence in the arts. There are plenty of opportunities to cultivate your passion for creativity in the city. Try  The Cincinnati Art Museum, The Contemporary Arts Center, The Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, and The Aronoff Center for the Arts.
Nature
While our main campus is a pristine oasis, there are dozens of parks with a short drive that students can access. In addition to Cincinnati Parks and Hamilton County Parks, there is The Cincinnati Nature Preserve.  And in the winter time, adventurers descend The Perfect North Ski Slopes just across the Indiana border.
There are also dozens of regional attractions like Kings Island Amusement Park, The Newport Aquarium,The Cincinnati Museum Center, and The National Underground Railroad Freedom Center. Cincinnati hosts numerous opportunities for learning and fun.
Student employment opportunities abound in the greater Cincinnati area. Opportunities are also plentiful for serving in the hundreds of churches throughout the tri-state area. Thus, the entire area can become a “laboratory” for a diverse, Christian growth experience.