Senior golf got just what it needed Thursday: the return of the Big Three.
For at least a day, Arnold Palmer, Jack Nicklaus and Gary Player were again on the centre stage in the world of golf.
The 71-year-old Palmer shot his age, Nicklaus, 61, matched his best round of the year in relation to par with a 4-under 68 and the 65-year-old Player had a 70 as the trio stole all the attention in the first round of the Senior PGA Championship.
You almost had to feel sorry for Jim Thorpe, who was hardly noticed in grabbing the lead with six birdies in a 67 on the tree-lined Ridgewood Country Club.
Nicklaus, Bob Gilder and Larry Nelson were a shot behind on the 6,904-yard course and one ahead of Hale Irwin, Jim Colbert and Doug Johnson.
Player and defending champion Doug Tewell, who eagled the par-4 14th with a six-iron from 167 yards, were in a group three shots back and one ahead of the pack led by Palmer.
"That's great! Fantastic," veteran Joe Inman said of the return of the Big Three, who had their own television show in the 1960s when they dominated the regular tour.
"When Jack tells you he is working on his game, Jack is working on his game," Inman said. "The most amazing thing is Arnold.
"He's 71 years old. Seventy-one!
"That's unbelievable. That's great for us.
"That's great for golf. That's great for everybody."
It's really super for the over-50 circuit, which has struggled keeping its fans with the likes of Palmer, Nicklaus, Player and Lee Trevino getting up in years and not being competitive on a weekly basis.
Playing early in the morning, Palmer seemed to ignite the old guard by shooting his age for the second time this year in a round that almost had the added bonus of a hole-in-one by golf's most beloved player.
His three-iron on the par-3, 205-yard 8th rimmed the cup before coming to rest less than four feet away.
Palmer, who has not won a PGA individual event since 1988, made the birdie.
"I sort of gave myself a little kick today," said Palmer, who brought golf into the modern age with his charismatic style.
"I said, `If you are going to play, either play and work on it and work out there and get positive, not so negative. And if you're not, just quit.' "
Player followed with a round that featured three birdies and a bogey and Nicklaus, who just the day before had talked about ending his competitive schedule because of inconsistent play, then challenged for the lead.
The Golden Bear birdied his first two holes in a round that featured five birdies and one bogey, a three-putt from 40 feet.
"I think it's nice to see the guys play well," Nicklaus said of the Big Three.
Nicklaus, whose best individual finish this year was a fourth place in a senior event in March, credited his improvement to the late Ben Hogan.
Nicklaus has been having trouble since hip surgery 2 1/2 years ago.
While fishing last weekend, Nicklaus decided to move his right foot back a little -- something Hogan did -- and that helped his swing, and got him in contention for his first title since 1996.
"I don't think it's too early to get excited about it," Nicklaus said. "I don't know whether it means anything except that I'm not nine shots out of the lead, which is my usual place."
Palmer's position is even more surprising
. He had been a combined 62 over par in his 13 previous rounds this season, which included a 71 at the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic in February.