De Gea plucks a Souare cross from the sky, and Palace have only one or two throws of the dice remaining.
Into the second of four added minutes.
Sky's Gary Neville has gone for Ashley Young as his Man of the Match, and it was his cross that set up Fellaini's probable winner. Herrera forces Speroni to tip the ball over his own bar with a first-time shot - United seeing this out on the front foot.
SAVE! De Gea foils Murray again, this time after a brilliant volley on the turn - chest and then head set himself up - that was straight at the legs of the United goalkeeper.
Off goes Chris Smalling, and on comes young Paddy McNair for United. Palace have, meanwhile, brought on Lee Chung-Yong for Mile Jedinak and Marouane Chamakh replaces Zaha.
Palace, undeterred, continue to pile forward but United - if they have any brain cells to spare between them - should be able to see this one out.
GOAL! Crystal Palace 1-2 Manchester United (Fellaini 78 min) Just as United were creaking, and Palace were buzzing, up pops the giant mop of Marouane Fellaini at the back post to nod home, as Speroni was stranded. De Gea should probably be credited with the assist for that save, though.
CHANCE! United respond, and Ashley Young's right-foot shot deflects off Scott Dann and creeps just wide of the far post. Fellaini is then adjudged offside as Mata puts the ball in the Palace net.
WHAT A SAVE FROM DE GEA. Glenn Murray has the ball, five yards out, and pokes a finish to De Gea's right, only for United's designated saviour to stick out an instinctive hand to block where he had no earthly right to do so. A trademark De Gea save, if there is such a thing.
Juan Mata, trying to force United back into this, sets Ashley Young down the left but his cross - for a professional footballer - is absolutely dreadful, and sails out for a throw-in on the far side.
At one end, Fellaini towers above the Palace defence, but his header is tame, before Glenn Murray almost releases Bolasie at the other end with a backheel. Breathless scenes at Selhurst Park.
This is fascinating stuff now. Bolasie's pace is stretching United at the back, and the visitors have yet to gather a semblance of rhythm in this second half.
CHANCE! United present James McArthur with the ball in midfield and he charges towards goal, eventually trying a left-foot shot into the far corner, which De Gea tips wide. United all over the shop, frankly.
Palace, tails quite justifiably up, press immediately for another goal, and Van Gaal is reorganising things in the United defence to weather the storm.
GOAL! Crystal Palace 1-1 Manchester United (Puncheon 57 min) Puncheon's left foot swings it up and - via the wimpy, raised arm of Daley Blind - over the wall and past De Gea. Palace are level!
Ander Herrera goes into the book for chopping down Souare. Palace now have a free-kick, right on the edge of the box, after Smalling tugged Murray's shirt. Possibilities here...
More fancy footwork from Bolasie, but his inswinging cross from the right is too close to De Gea. Palace have started the second half very, very brightly, which bodes well for this game as a spectacle. Still can't quite see it featuring heavily on Premier League Years on Sky Sports 3 in a few years' time, though.
Half chance for the hosts. De Gea invites some Palace pressure by pinging a goal-kick straight out of play in his own half. Souare is released down the left, and his whipped cross is met by the outside of Murray's boot - side netting.
Jason Puncheon has replaced Joe Ledley for Palace, I should also add. Bolasie has gone up top with Murray, as Palace begin their search for an equaliser.
Wayne Rooney's thigh injury has finally got the better of him at half-time, and Radamel Falcao's beleaguered expression will replace him. The second half is under way!
The first half at Selhurst Park, summed up in three simple images:
A decent first half in the late-afternoon haze. United deserve their lead, as their attacking endeavour had a little more craft and precision to go with it than Palace's. Scott Dann's handball, and Juan Mata's penalty, separate the sides at the break and United - as it stands - look good for a top-four finish.
More work for the physios, as Rooney goes down with another knock and Zaha is also floored. Both seem OK to continue, but Falcao is warming up.
United end the half with a corner but don't commit too many men forward and Speroni gathers.
Palace press, and the ball juggles around in the edge of the United box, but they still can't carve out a goalscoring chance worthy of the description. Four added minutes in this first half...
Herrera clips in a cross to the back post, where Fellaini is lurking, but his first touch sends the ball straight into Speroni's arms.
Rooney wants a second penalty for handball, this time by Delaney, but referee Oliver is unmoved.
Phil Jones has moved to left-back, at least temporarily, which presents an intriguing match-up with Bolasie for us to enjoy.
Phil Jones backtracking against Bolasie. We may hit peak Vine.
The luckless Shaw's game is over, by the look of it. It was an inadvertent elbow from James McArthur that did the damage, and United are rightly exercising caution here. Jonny Evans comes on to replace him.
Luke Shaw is down with a facial injury - he's looking groggy - and Rooney continues to be troubled with a thigh knock. Meanwhile, here's the handball - judge for yourself:
The Palace fans want a penalty, as Marouane Fellaini eases Joel Ward over in the area. The ball was running out of play, though, and it didn't look excessive from Fellaini.
Juan Mata squeezes home the opener:
GOAL! Crystal Palace 0-1 Manchester United (Mata) http://t.co/cpx9vYJyO9 #SkyFootball #SNF pic.twitter.com/9VrRYLy7mw
Wayne Rooney's limping. Sky's co-commentator Gary Neville will keep an eye on that situation for me.
Andy "Andrew" Cole has his say on the penalty incident:
I agree with @GNev2 seems to me Dann got his positioning all wrong! This pitch isn't helping.. Needs to get the sprinklers on it
Juan Mata concedes a free-kick, 30 yards out. Palace unleash a convoluted training-ground routine, which almost creates a chance in the box, but United clear.
Palace win their first corner, which Joe Ledley swings onto the onrushing head of Mile Jedinak. David de Gea watches it safely sail high and wide of his goal, but it momentarily looked destined for the proverbial postage stamp.
Handball is a tediously vague subject for discussion at the best of times, but that was (just about) a penalty. Dann leaned in to the cross, rendering any observations about unnaturally-positioned arms rather null and void.
GOAL! Crystal Palace 0-1 Manchester United (Mata pen 19) Juan Mata draws the short straw for penalty-taking duties, and his sidefooted effort is just powerful enough to squeeze past the dive of Speroni. United lead!
PENALTY TO MANCHESTER UNITED! Scott Dann is adjudged to have handballed a cross, as he leaned in to block.
Zaha beats Valencia with some lightning-quick footwork on the left, and his cross is a good one - deep into the heart of the United box - but Glenn Murray is foiled by a combination of Luke Shaw and Phil Jones.
Ander Herrera's turn to try his luck from distance, but his 30-yarder flashes across the Palace goal and Speroni is unworried.
First glimpse of Wilfried Zaha, who gathers a long ball from Joel Ward, holds off a couple of challenges from his former teammates to work space for a cross...which is overhit.
Not much in the way of velvet first touches or crisp passing so far in the tea-time sunshine. The pitch looks nice from here, but it might not be playing too well for both teams.
POST! Daley Blind picks up the ball 30 yards out, takes a touch to steady himself and pings a left-foot shot against Speroni's left-hand goalpost. Speroni got a touch, it emerges, but United waste the corner.
Yannick Bolasie delights a section of the home fans with some delightful footwork to evade Young, and that's the best thing Palace have produced so far.
United win the first corner, as Speroni just fails to scoop up a deflected Valencia cross in time. Chris Smalling rises highest for the delivery, but he's crowded out before he can make a connection. The visitors being allowed most of the ball so far.
A few players sliping and sliding in these early moments. Appropriately then, Ashley Young is getting some early boos from the Palace faithful for a penalty he won last season.
We're off and under way. United all in white, kicking from right to lef....ah, what's the point, this isn't radio.
Here come both teams - kick-off is mere moments away at Selhurst Park...
Alan Pardew, meanwhile, isn't doing any melting down. He sounds perfectly relaxed, so much so that I barely listened to a word he said. "Big day for Wilf [Zaha]" was one thing I do recall, though.
The business end of the season and Manchester United are traditional bedfellows, of course, so here's a nice retrospective from my colleague Darren Richman on Kevin Keegan's title-race meltdown as Alex Ferguson's United breathed down his Newcastle side's collective neck in 1996.
Van Gaal talks to Sky - the United camp has been hit by a virus this week, apparently:
"Van Persie has been touched...a lot of players have problems. It's not easy to make a line-up."
Louis van Gaal here, taking in the v...just standing around, that's all.
Burnley are officially, mathematically, well and truly relegated, meanwhile.
Not been the best couple of days for Alistair Campbell.
I've neglected to confirm this afternoon's referee, so here is that confirmation, along with the region of the UK from which he hails:
Referee: Michael Oliver (Northumberland)
Northumberland. As far as referee birthplaces go, it's no Tring. Or Chester-le-Street. Or Orpington.
With a Pardew-powered Palace comfortably ensconced in mid-table, this is all about United trying to wrap up fourth place, which Louis van Gaal is getting dangerously close to regarding as a trophy. What sort of trophy could be commissioned for finishing fourth? Nothing too flashy - perhaps something like the Intertoto Cup (either version would suffice, but the plaque really was special):
Crystal Palace: Speroni; Ward, Dann, Delaney, Souare; Jedinak (C), Ledley, McArthur; Zaha, Bolasie; Murray
Subs: Hennessey, Kelly, Puncheon, Mutch, Lee, Chamakh, Campbell
Manchester United: De Gea, Valencia, Jones, Smalling, Shaw, Blind, Herrera, Mata, Fellaini, Young, Rooney
Subs: Valdes, Evans, McNair, Pereira, Januzaj, Falcao, Wilson
Good afternoon all. Let's begin with a classic Crystal Palace v Manchester United moment. No, it's not Eric Cantona going quietly in 1995, nor is it Ian Wright's contribution to the 1990 FA Cup final. Instead, let's reacquaint ourselves with Roy Keane stamping on Gareth Southgate's balls:
I'll have team news for you, imminently.
Adam Hurrey will be here from 4.30pm to talk you through today's game at Selhurst Park, which promises to be reasonably exciting, if Alan Pardew can still be bothered. In the meantime, here's Louis Van Gaal on why he signed Memhis Depay to irritate PSG:
Louis van Gaal has admitted he was forced to accelerate a £25million move for Memphis Depay in order to prevent the Holland winger signing for Paris Saint-Germain.
PSV Eindhoven youngster Depay has become Manchester United’s first signing of the summer after agreeing a four-year deal at Old Trafford, despite strong interest from PSG and Liverpool.
But Van Gaal, who selected Depay for his Dutch World Cup squad last year, admitted he would have waited until the end of the season to sign the player had PSG not been ready to pounce.
"I have been forced to sign him before the end of this season,” said Van Gaal. "We have to focus on the remaining games but when you sign a new player you can disturb the focus of the current ones.
"But because of the market, we had to handle this because otherwise he would have signed for Paris Saint Germain.
“At that time he was not reached by me. But because of the club's relationship with PSV, I could handle it."
Van Gaal, meanwhile, has confirmed that midfielder Michael Carrick will miss the rest of the season a calf injury.
United have lost all three games without Carrick since the England international suffered the injury against Manchester City last month.
"Carrick is not available, it was more serious than we thought," said van Gaal. "We tried everything but now we have to think about next season. He shall not play anymore this season, it's better now to focus for him on next season and being fit to start.
"When you see the stats, it's clear that he's very important but that's also because we have only right-sided holding midfielder.
“That's what I have been saying already in the whole of the season, that our selection is not balanced, and I want to restore that in the next transfer period.
“The life is not ending at 34, but for a professional football player, it's close by. That's why I have to handle again in that position."
Did you know Telegraph Sport has a Manchester United Facebook page?