April 27, 2011 (Santee) – Sportsplex USA has teamed up with SoccerNation to organize an indoor soccer tournament to recognize and honor  active, non-active military friends and family as well as local area veterans.
The tournament will take place at Sportsplex USA Santee located at 9951 Riverwalk Drive, Santee 92071 on Saturday, May 21st between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. and will bring together soccer enthusiasts and military supporters from all over San Diego County.
All of San Diego’s professional soccer teams have agreed to take part in this event.  These teams are the SD Flash, San Diego Sockers, San Diego Boca FC and the San Diego SeaLions.  Members of each of these teams will be on-site during the event to offer free soccer skill clinics to all children and teens in attendance.
In addition to exciting indoor soccer tournament action, there will be a military service recognition ceremony  at noon, sponsor booths, giveaways and great food & beverage specials offered throughout the day.   All local businesses interested in being part of this event are encouraged to contact Chris Vertrees, Marketing Director for Sportsplex USA at chris.vertrees@sportsplexusa.com. There are several sponsor packages available for those hoping to have on-site presence that day.
Sportsplex USA and SoccerNation.com hopes to sell out the event with 16 total teams and nearly 1000 participants and spectators that day.
John Kentera, General Manager of the PASL indoor soccer Championship team, the San Diego Sockers says, “The San Diego Sockers are tremendously excited about this event and very happy to be a part of it.  You can always count on the Sockers to want to be a part of honoring our military.  Being the Champions of North American indoor soccer, our players are happy to come out and play soccer with the military.  We look forward to being part of this event.”
Diane Scavuzzo, Editor in Chief of SoccerNation says,“Everyone knows someone who has or is serving our country and we are all thankful for all their brave determination to protect the USA.  My uncles served in the Army. My best friend’s son is serving now. Come celebrate the great game of soccer and join us all as we salute those who provide us with the freedom to enjoy our lives.”
Clent Alexander, CEO of the SD Flash says, "We should always stop and think of our military brothers and sisters who do more than any of us to defend our country and our way of life.  My dad was in the Navy and a few of our players from last year are now actively serving and we appreciate the time they spent with us. We are pleased to honor our Armed Forces in the First Annual Indoor Soccer Tournament."
Chris Vertrees, Marketing Director for Sportsplex USA says, "We are very excited to partner with SoccerNation to create and facilitate this great indoor soccer tournament.  We are proud to support and honor our active and non-active duty military members.  Since 1993, Sportsplex USA has strived to serve our armed service members with great sports leagues and events.  We are thrilled to have this exciting indoor soccer tournament at our newest complex in Santee.  Everyone at Sportsplex USA is looking forward to hosting our military friends and showing our appreciation and gratitude to everyone who has served our nation", says Vertrees.
Yan Skwara President and CEO of San Diego Boca FC says,  "Everyday we must to be thankful for the freedom that our military provides all of us. Having our pro players offering clinics and skill demonstrations for the Sportsplex USA and SoccerNation's Indoor Tournament is something we look forward to. We are very excited to be working on this event."
Amie Becker, General Manager of San Diego SeaLions says, “The SeaLions are proud to participate in this tournament. Not only have we had players who have served in the armed forces, we also have several wives of currently active soldiers who play with us. We are exceedingly grateful for the sacrifices they make in order to ensure that we have a safe place to play our game and live our lives. We're happy to do our part to honor the brave men and women who fight for our freedom.”
Martin Torres, President and CEO of Tiburones United FC says, ““We are grateful for what our military does day in and day out to keep this country what it has always been * Land Of The Free * Being part of this tournament and uniting for this cause is great! United we can accomplish many things to help and thank our military for everything they do for us. TUFC’s 2010/2011 MVP Carlos Adriano was the best GK of the league (league MVP) and he is an active military member. Big thanks to SoccerNation & Sportsplex USA for this event!”
Kevin Fulton of SoccerNation says, "When we talk about active Military, it's really everyone in the family that serve, Mom, Dad & the kids.  They all are making sacrifices for our country. It's because of what the Military families do for us that allows us to live in the greatest Nation on earth.  It's because of them we get to come and play soccer and have fun.  This is a group of people that make America Great! I'm glad to set aside a few minutes and tell them THANK YOU! The next time a Military Jet of Helicopter flies over, stop and listen....that's the sound of Freedom!"
Cost for the tournament is only $250 per team.  If your team consists of at least 50% military active duty members (with military ID), your team fee FREE!   Additionally all those showing a valid military ID will receive FREE entry to Sportsplex USA the day of the event.
Registered teams will receive three guaranteed pool play games with the top teams advancing to the playoff rounds, referee fees, participant T-shirt, and awards for top finishing teams.  There will be two divisions offered; Coed Open and Men's Open. Tournament game times to be determined based upon total registration.
This festive event is open to all players and teams who currently participate at Sportsplex USA. For more information, or to confirm your spot in the tournament, please contact Chris Vertrees at chris.vertrees@sportsplexusa.com or at 619-334-1000 x446.   All those who contact be given all the registration details.  Event is limited to 16 total teams, so get your team together today!