In June 2016, this chapter was updated with regards to the Modern Slavery Act 2015 and the consideration of any issues that may indicate that the child is or has been trafficked or a victim of compulsory labour, servitude and slavery.
For the purposes of this chapter, a young unaccompanied asylum seeker is a child who is applying for asylum in their own right and is separated from both parents and is not being cared for by an adult who in law or by custom has responsibility to do so.
This  chapter describes the particular issues arising in referrals involving young  unaccompanied asylum seekers.
In all such referrals, the Procedures  in relation to the child’s Assessment will apply as set out in child's Assessment (including Section 47 Enquiries).
Where a young unaccompanied asylum seeker becomes Looked After, the procedures in this manual relating to Looked After Children apply. Independent Reviewing Officers need to be aware of local authority duties to take regard of the child’s needs as an unaccompanied or trafficked child when planning and providing for care. They must also have an awareness of the particular needs and issues children may face as a result of being an unaccompanied or trafficked child so that they can provide appropriate challenge at review. Foster or residential care providers need to be aware of appropriate steps to reduce the risk of trafficked children returning to their traffickers.
To be eligible for a service, a young unaccompanied asylum-seeker must  be seeking asylum in the UK and have no relative/supporting adult willing to  take responsibility for him or her. Where such young people are provided  with services, they will continue to be eligible for a service from the local  authority where they achieve discretional leave top remain up to their 18th  birthday.
In relation to all new referrals, the duty worker in the  relevant Team must complete a Referral Form, and check all Home Office  documentation and evidence that the young person has resided in or has a local  connection to the local authority area.
Most UASC's come into the country with very little documentation.  In order to start the process of initially identifying the UASC we need to  gather the following information:
If  the child has not claimed asylum yet, the UK Visas and Immigration will need to be informed and a date arranged for the child to be supported to claim asylum.
An  assessment of age is carried out:
In all  cases where a referral is received concerning an unaccompanied young  asylum-seeker, the relevant Team will carry out a child's Assessment in  accordance with the child's Assessment (including Section 47 Enquiries) Procedure. The child’s Assessment will take account of:
In  determining an unaccompanied young person's accommodation needs, the child’s Assessment must have regard to his or her age and independent living skills,  and consider the intensity of service required. This may range between independent accommodation,  semi-independent accommodation and foster placements.
An  interpreter will be used to assist in all assessments.
The  caseworker must complete a child’s Assessment Record in all cases.
Care of Unaccompanied and Trafficked Children: Statutory Guidance for Local Authorities on the Care of Unaccompanied Asylum Seeking and Trafficked Children (2014) provides that where the age of a person is uncertain and there are reasons to believe that they are a child, they are presumed to be a child in order to receive immediate access to assistance, support and protection in accordance with Article 10(3) of the European Convention on action Against Trafficking in Human Beings.  Age assessments should only be carried out where there is significant reason to doubt that the claimant is a child. Age assessments should not be a routine part of a local authority’s assessment of unaccompanied or trafficked children. Where age assessments are conducted, they must be Merton Compliant.
The  assessment of age is a complex task, which usually involves a face-to-face  meeting and often relies on professional judgement and discretion. Such  assessment may be compounded by issues of disability. Some young people may  genuinely not know their age and this can be misread as lack of co-operation.  Levels of competence in some areas or tasks may exceed or fall short of our  expectations of a child of the same age in this country.
The  advice of a paediatrician with experience in considering age may be needed to  assist in this, in the context of a holistic assessment. However, the High  Court has ruled that, unless a paediatrician's report can add something  specific to an assessment of age undertaken by an experienced social worker, it  will not be necessary.
The child should be offered an Independent Visitor and, if they decline, their reasons should be recorded.  Any Independent Visitor appointed should have appropriate training and demonstrate an understanding of the needs faced by unaccompanied or trafficked children.
In addition, unaccompanied children should be informed of the availability of the Assisted Voluntary Return Scheme.
Where  it is established as a result of the child’s Assessment that the referral  concerns a young unaccompanied asylum-seeker, this will always satisfy the  criteria for services to a Child in Need.
Where there are concerns that a young person has suffered or is likely  to suffer Significant Harm, for example as a result of trafficking and/or  sexual exploitation, the social worker must discuss the case with the manager  and consider whether the circumstances warrant a Strategy Discussion/Meeting and Section 47 Enquiry.
See also: Safeguarding Children and Young People from Sexual Exploitation (Rotherham Local Safeguarding Children Board Procedures Manual).
Where a  child’s Assessment identifies that a young unaccompanied asylum seeker  is in need of services, the young person should be provided with information  about the services available to them from the local authority and other  agencies.
The  young person will also be given assistance to register with a GP and dentist,  and enrol in a local school or college. An interpreter should be booked to accompany the young person to  appointments with the GP, where necessary (note most NHS GPs will have access  to language line (telephone interpreters).
Where a  young person's needs are for independent or semi-independent accommodation, and  the manager agrees, assistance should be given with completion of the necessary  Housing Application.
Where  the child’s Assessment identifies that an unaccompanied young asylum-seeker  needs to be Looked After, all the procedures in relation to Care Plans, Health  Care Plans, Personal Education Plans and Placement Plans must be completed. See Decision to Look After and Care Planning Procedure.
All  unaccompanied young asylum-seekers who are eligible for a service will be  entitled to financial assistance which must first be authorised by the  manager. The social worker should  arrange for payment of the relevant amounts in accordance with the local  authority's detailed financial procedures.
Travel  cards or warrants will be issued to young unaccompanied asylum-seekers in  relation to appointments at the Home Office.
The  following descriptions below explain the different asylum status'
A family or young person may be refused a service where, for example:
Where  a child’s Assessment identifies that a young unaccompanied asylum-seeker does  not meet the criteria for a service from Children's Services, but appears to be  in need of services from elsewhere, the social worker will refer the young  person to the appropriate agency which may be a different Children's Services  authority, the Refugee Council, the UK Visas and Immigration and/or an appropriate voluntary agency.
In such  circumstances, the duty worker should make an appointment for the young person  and advise him or her of the name, address (including a map where necessary)  and contact number of the person with whom the appointment has been made. In addition, the duty worker must fax a copy  of the Referral Form and child’s Assessment Record to the relevant office.
In all  cases where a service is to be refused, the social worker must consult his or  her manager before the decision is made and the letter confirming the decision  is sent. Any correspondence received in  relation to the decision should be referred to the manager.
The provision of a service is dependent on the young person continuing to qualify for the service.
Services to an unaccompanied young person may be withdrawn, for example, where  another adult wishes to assume Parental Responsibility and this is considered  appropriate.
The  service should not be withdrawn without the agreement of the social worker's manager. Any such decision must be clearly recorded,  with reasons. In all such cases, legal  advice should usually be obtained before a final decision is made.
Where a  service is withdrawn, the social worker should inform the Finance Office, if  appropriate, immediately.
Where  an unaccompanied young asylum-seeker reaches the age of 18, and the young  person's legal status remains unresolved, a referral to the UK Visas and Immigration  should be made.
Where  the young person is Looked After, the case will remain with the Leaving Care  Team on the young person's 18th birthday and the Leaving Care Team will be  responsible for implementing the procedures in relation to Eligible Young  People and Relevant Young People, as appropriate, in accordance with Leaving  Care Procedure.
Pathway planning should address any additional needs arising from the young person’s immigration issues.
Planning may have to be based around short-term achievable goals whilst entitlement to remain in the UK is being determined. For the majority of unaccompanied children who do not have permanent immigration status, transition planning should initially take a dual or triple planning perspective, which, over time should be refined as the young person’s immigration status is resolved. Planning cannot pre-empt the outcome of any immigration decision and may be based on:
Assistance  should be given in advance of their 18th birthday with the necessary  applications for housing, Housing Benefit and any other relevant benefits. The social worker must ensure that the young  person has accommodation to which to move on his or her 18th birthday. The social worker must also ensure that the  provider of the young person's present accommodation and the Finance Office is  informed when the accommodation arrangement will end.
Where a  young person is Looked After, his or her case will be reviewed in accordance  with the Looked After Reviews Procedure.
Any  other services provided should be reviewed at least every 6 months as set out  in the Child in Need Plans and Reviews Procedure.
The  young person should be invited to the Review and an interpreter should be  booked as necessary.
Where a  Review confirms the service, the Financial Assessment Form should be updated. Where additional support services are  identified as necessary, the Plan should be updated to reflect this.