&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Michael Cox - The Pogrebnyak chance was a big moment, in hindsight. He made a complete mess of that. The biggest Reading bottling since Daphne &amp;amp; Celeste&lt;/noframe&gt;
"They were very strong in the challenges, we struggled in the 50-50s. They were on a different planet of motivation."
A cruel end for Reading, who battled bravely/gamely/pluckily (delete as appropriate), and Arsenal are on course to defend the FA Cup. Adam Federici was the unfortunate fall guy - he's headed straight down the tunnel - and he's unlikely to forget that Sanchez shot that slipped from his grasp.
Walcott is sliced down on the edge of the box. Arsenal have a free-kick, and about 1.99 feet in the cup final.
Sanchez, the absolute machine, is still haring about to close down the Reading defenders as they try and launch an attack.
Jamie Mackie is thr...no, he's offside again.
Reading are giving it one last push, and Arsenal's defending is far from decisive. Danny Williams tries a shot from 25 yards, which is a waste, and the holders survive.
Giroud hits the post! Ozil releases the substitute in the area, but the angle is tight and Federici is advancing.
2007's Yakubu is about to come on for Reading, and Pogrebnyak makes way. They now have a proven finisher on the field, but it might be too late...
...and it's a tantalising delivery, but Szczesny gets enough on his punch and Arsenal eventually clear.
Yellow for Gabriel, who hasn't covered himself in glory so far. Reading free-kick...
Ozil drags a shot wide, just as it opens up for him on the edge of the box.
Straight round, though, and Arsenal threaten again, but Reading desperately block. Arsenal piling men forward, and rather asking for trouble, but I'm not convinced Reading can pull this back again.
Federici tries in vain to salvage Reading's FA Cup final dreams.
GOAL! Reading 1-2 Arsenal (Sanchez 105) Heartbreak for the Reading goalkeeper. Sanchez cuts in from the right, drills a shot straight at Federici, who lets it slip between his gloves, between his legs, and over the line.
Aaron Ramsey rifles in a shot, which Federici deflects rather uncomfortably over his own crossbar. Unorthodox, and terrifying, but it worked. Anywhere will do for Reading, currently.
Walcott has slotted in on the right of the Arsenal attack, poised for a Cazorla or Ozil through-ball. Reading have retreated into a resolute, blue-and-white mass, and are doing alright here.
Theo Walcott is being readied for Arsenal, which I'm sure the Reading defenders are throughly looking forward to. Would they take penalties now? I really, really want penalties.
"BBC News will follow this programme."
Always the sign of a good game.
All Arsenal so far in extra time, as Reading legs start to look a little heavy.
Santi Cazorla finally finds some space, 25 yards out, to set himself for a right-foot shot but it's well over the bar.
Here we go in extra time. Huddles were formed, legs were rubbed, extra gears were summoned. This will be fun, I hope.
Here's Steve Clarke, very possibly after the leaden-legged Pogrebnyak juggernaut spurned that late chance to win it for Reading.
Arsenal have a free-kick, the last throw of their dice in normal time. Giroud gets on the end of it, but his tame header is straight at Federici. And that's it - extra time beckons!
Hal Robson-Kanu (who looks knackered) comes off, Jem Karacan will replace him. There will be two added minutes...
Agonisingly close! Pogrebnyak embarks on the most hopeless-looking one-man counter-attack in the history of the world, which suddenly becomes a glorious chance to win it for Reading. Mackie busts a lung or two to join him, but the Russian goes alone. His intention isn't clear, but the ball ricochets into Szczesny's arms. What a chance.
Five minutes remain before a chance to catch some breath. Ramsey took the right option in putting his boot through that shot, but it still goes down as a gilt-edged chance.
Drama! Chalobah, as the PA announcer distracts everyone with the official attendance, tries a speculative left-foot shot from 25 yards. Szczesny beats it cout for a corner but, in the blink of an eye, Arsenal break up the other end. Ramsey breaks through, beats Federici and - from an angle, rattles the post!
Aaron Ramsey, who's been peripheral in this match, tries to barrel his way through the massed Reading ranks. It doesn't work, as has been demonstrated about 14 times before in the last 82 minutes.
10 minutes to go at Wembley. Neither side looking like settling for extra time just now, but I suspect the idea might dawn on the Reading players first.
Mackie is dragged down by Gabriel, but the referee allows play to continue as Pogrebnyak takes the ball on, but he drags a team shot across goal. They might have preferred the free-kick there.
Sanchez spots the run of Giroud into the Reading box, but Federici is off his line like an Olympic spirinter from the blocks and dives at Giroud's feet to claim it.
The Reading midfield engine keeps going, committing men forward one minute, then suffocating Arsenal counter-attacks the next. How long can they keep it up?
Arsenal now have a chance to swing the ball in from a free-kick. Ozil does so, and Gabriel - utterly unmarked, six yards out - heads wildly off target. That should have been 2-1.
As Giroud waits to enter the fray, Reading have a free-kick on the right. In it swings from Obita, but it evades everyone on its way out. Welbeck is the one to make way for Giroud.
Here comes Olivier Giroud.
Arsenal try and work some neat patterns on the edge of the Reading box, but Chalobah is alert to concede a corner. Then, Arsenal hit the woodwork! Gabriel loses his marker, and his header is set for the top corner until Federici's palm diverts it on to the crossbar.
Vehement, but hopeful, shouts from Reading for handball in the Arsenal area, but it was very much ball to hand. The BBC's Danny Murphy has "seen them given", of course.
The Arsenal offside trap is taking huge risks - Pogrebnyak is its latest unlucky victim, but Reading are piling forward at every opportunity. The first half is a distant memory.
Cometh the hour(ish), cometh the a man. Per Mertesacker, struggling since he was caught by a Reading boot a few minutes ago, is replaced by the Brazilian defender Gabriel. Not quite a game-changing substitution, this.
Reading tails are up, and suddenly the passes are crisp rather than tentative, and the tackles decisive rather than panicked. Arsenal yet to gather themselves since the equaliser.
GOAL! Reading 1-1 Arsenal (McCleary 54) Is it in...it's in! Pogrebynak digs out a cross from the left, and Gareth McCleary does well at the back post to get a strong right foot on it. Szczesny perhaps isn't expecting it, and it pops up off his body and over the line before he can reclaim it. There's a few seconds of suspense, but referee Atkinson signals for a goal! Game on.
Reading press again, mainly through McCleary, but Arsenal stand firm. Only a misplaced Sanchez crossfield pass halts their progress on the counter, but this could well be the pattern for the remainder of the match.
Mertesacker was, unsurprisingly, the target but the cross hits him on the back and creeps wide of Federici's post.
Reading showing more intent from the off in this second half, but Arsenal threaten to counter with pace. Sanchez is felled by Hector, and Arsenal have the chance to swing the ball in from the left.
No changes for either side at half time. We go again.
Spot the unimpressed Reading supporter, as Sanchez celebrates:
Arsenal's official Twitter feed isn't getting carried away.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Arsenal FC - Half-time: Reading 1-0 &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/Arsenal" target="_blank"&gt;@Arsenal&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23RFCvAFC" target="_blank"&gt;#RFCvAFC&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
Not a revelatory first half. Reading shut up shop almost immmediately, and Arsenal were showing early signs of frustration before Sanchez showed some Premier League class to gather the ball and finish with the minimum of fuss.
That was the only moment of clear quality in that first half, and Reading didn't quite have enough to prevent it.
Chalobah goes into the book for scything down Kieran Gibbs on the left.
An Ozil corner is headed towards his own goal by Alex Pearce but, from the second corner, Reading break forward and almost force an opening just before half-time. Arsenal deserve their lead, however. One added minute.
Danny Williams unceremoniously shoves Sanchez to the ground as he shields the ball in midfield. Lucky to escape a yellow there, as it was right in front of the referee.
GOAL! Reading 0-1 Arsenal (Sanchez 39) Mesut Ozil clips a lovely ball into Alexis Sanchez, who keeps a remarkably cool head to turn the defender, steady himself and plant a right-foot finish into the bottom left corner of the net. Lovely pass, lovely control, decent finish. Arsenal lead in the semi-final!
Obita dawdles on the ball, and Ramsey almost punishes him by releasing
Sanchez twists and turns out on the right wing, so much so that he runs it out of play and emphasises just how well-drilled the Reading defence has been. Space very much at a premium at their end of the pitch.
Aaron Ramsey just foul-threw, and the match officals ignored it. Disgrace. Reading release the shackles, and allow Jamie Mackie to enter the Arsenal half. Not for long, though.
Alexis Sanchez, in the middle of the pitch, tries to unpick the Reading lock from outside the box, but no fewer than SIX opponents guard the way.
John Madejski giving some indication of how much this means to him and his beloved Royals:
Laurent Koscielny is feeling his nose, after a robust aerial challenge from Mackie, but - after some treatment on the sideline - is back with us.
Brief moment of panic for Reading. Sanchez races onto the ball on the edge of the box, where an onrushing - and fully committed - Adam Federici greets him. Sanchez pokes the ball past him (and out of play), there's a brief suspicion of a foul, but referee Martin Atkinson is unmoved.
Reading conceded about the fifth - and certainly not the final - foul in midfield as Cazorla breaks forward. The outsiders could do with a little more of the ball here...
Cazorla tries to whip a shot, but gets underneath it and the ball flies high over the bar. Reading keeping their shape quite well so far.
Reading - full of Wembley adrenalin - are chasing everything in midfield, but Arsenal keep the passes popping about.
Close! Mesut Ozil stands over a free-kick, 30 yards out, and right of centre. He gets the ball up and down but, it drifts inches wide of Federici and the post.
Alexis Sanchez overhits another cross, this time for the advancing right-back Debuchy. The jeers from the Reading fans consist of 10% ridicule and 90% relief.
Welbeck heads the free-kick clear, but only as far as Nathaniel Chalobah, 16 yards out. His volley looks goalbound but deflects over for a corner, which Arsenal clear.
Jamie Mackie races through, but is denied by the assistant's flag. Koscielny might just have kept him offside but life goes on. Reading win a free-kick, 25 yards from goal. Interesting...
First chance for Reading. A McCleary cross finds its way to Obita, whose fierce drive is straight at Szczesny.
The ball falls to Sanchez in the box and, with minimal backlift, he pokes a shot goalwards that deflects wide for a corner. Mertesacker rises at the near post to test Federici, and Arsenal force another corner which comes to nought.
It's Sanchez's turn to hit the deck after a robust challenge, but Arsenal are already well into their passing rhythm. Reading camped in their own half - tents, fires, marshmallows, the lot.
Danny Welbeck races on to a long ball from Kieran Gibbs, but Federici is alert enough to smother the danger, and the ball deflects off Welbeck for a goal-kick.
Ramsey is floored by an unintentional Obita arm (or perhaps a mere finger in the eye) on the halfway line. He is unhappy about it, but otherwise fine.
The Wembley pitch is an absolute picture, and a far cry from the treacherous surface that saw England slip and slide out of Euro 2008 qualification. Alexis Sanchez pings the mango ball towards Aaron Ramsey at the back post, but it skips out for a Reading goal-kick.
Let's do this. Reading, in their familiar blue-and-white hoops, kick this off FA Cup semi-final. This is Arsenal's 28th appearance at the penultimate hurdle of the competition, everyone.
The teams are emerging from the tunnel, including Arsenal's birthday boy Wojciech Szczesny, getting the nod in goal ahead of David Ospina, who's presided over Arsenal's tremendous run of recent form. Handshakes are taking place...
Hello! Wembley FA Cup semi-finals, eh? I don't know about you, but I'd like to see one or more of the following things this afternoon:
1) A belting free-kick
2) Some last-minute drama
3) Unbridled post-match joy
"I'm now away to get me suit...MEASUAARED"
Reading: Federici, Gunter, Pearce, Pogrebnyak, Robson-Kanu, Obita, Chalobah, McCleary, Mackie, Williams, Hector.
Arsenal: Szczesny, Debuchy, Gibbs, Mertesacker, Koscielny, Ozil, Ramsey, Alexis, Cazorla, Welbeck, Coquelin.
Adam will be in at about 5pm to bring you the game, but before then have a read of the articles above and the preview below.
Preview: Defender Per Mertesacker believes Arsenal have become a stronger unit from their FA Cup success of last season, but cannot allow themselves any sense of complacency against Reading at Wembley in Saturday's FA Cup semi-final.
The Gunners head into the tie on the back of a superb run of form, which has seen them win 16 from 18 matches in all competitions and up into second place in the Barclays Premier League.
The atmosphere around the club is certainly a world way from the tense finale to the 2013/2014 campaign, when Arsenal were under extreme pressure in the quest to finally end a near decade wait for silverware as well as finish in the top four of the Barclays Premier League once again, not to mention the uncertainty around the future of manager Arsene Wenger.
Those ambitions were within eight minutes of being shattered when trailing 1-0 to Wigan in their semi-final 12 months ago, before Mertesacker made amends for giving away an earlier penalty when heading home a late equaliser to force extra-time and a nerve-shredding penalty shoot-out victory that in turn set up a final against Hull, which itself proved just as dramatic as Arsenal came from 2-0 down to lift the trophy.
"It is a good warning to all of us. You need to be focused 100% Reading, so it is going to be a tough one for us," said the German, who will again lead the team out at Wembley with captain Mikel Arteta still not fit.
"We suffered a bit last season on that occasion with that pressure, but it was a great experience and hopefully we can manage that a bit better.
"We are on a good level of confidence, but there will be pressure on us because we are super favourites and can we handle that during the game?"
Mertesacker added: "It is going to be Reading's biggest game of the season, so to mentally prepare for that is going to be difficult, not just to match their physicality and mental strength, but to do more, to be on the ball from the start, to show them respect, but no fear for the pressure.
"The winning streak helps us a bit, but this competition is completely different.
"It is the best competition I have ever played in because so many big teams struggle, but I don't want to struggle. I want to repeat the success (of 2014), so let's make sure that we are on the same level and do more than our opponent.
"I feel that we are really sharp and eager to repeat it. We have the chance to do it because we did well before and that is something I want to build on."
Mertesacker believes the squad have it within themselves to sustain a challenge for honours in the coming seasons.
The German continued: "To go on or to be consistent - that is a tough target, but we push ourselves.
"We want to be able to defend a title and be able to compete at the top which makes us at the moment a good team.
"We haven't shown that consistently this season because all of a sudden we lost one game [in the Champions League last 16 first leg to Monaco] and in a cup competition you cannot afford that.
"Even in the Premier League, if you lose four games, you cannot win the title, so that is something we really try to push ourselves to the next level."
The bedrock of Arsenal's resurgence has been the return to fitness of key men, which has left the likes of Theo Walcott, Danny Welbeck and Kieran Gibbs all looking on from the bench.
Jack Wilshere could be another in contention this weekend, having recovered from minor ankle surgery.
Mertesacker believes such strength in depth can only be a positive for the squad's development.
"It is weird, but it is really good, the competition we have got at the moment. It is really something that lifts everyone at the club," he said.
"Obviously there are going to be a few disappointing situations for players, but we have to respect the manager's decision and not to let anyone down, if someone is not in the squad."
Via Jim van Wijk, Press Association Sport