SAN DIEGO, Calif., Oct. 12, 2016 (SEND2PRESS NEWSWIRE) — Bank of Southern California, N.A. (OTC Pink: BCAL / OTCMKTS:BCAL) announced today that it has selected nCino’s Bank Operating System to automate the Bank’s lending and treasury management processes, enabling the bank to ultimately better serve its customers.
Bank of Southern California vetted a handful of solutions, but chose nCino because its platform combines the functionality of an industry leading business process management system with loan origination, a robust customer relationship management (CRM) system, and customized reporting, all delivered in a single, secure, cloud-based environment that easily integrates with the Bank’s existing systems.
Tony DiVita, Executive Vice President and Director of Sales for Bank of Southern California, commented, “The bank continues to experience strong year-over-year growth and we were looking for a solution that would be scalable and flexible to support our continued growth. The nCino Bank Operating System will help us improve our process from origination to customer onboarding with a seamless, integrated experience that empowers our employees to better serve our customers. nCino will allow us to be more efficient, which will help us focus more on customer engagement and origination.”
“Growing financial institutions need a flexible, scalable solution that allows them to expand while maintaining the same degree of organization, compliance and customer service,” said Josh Glover, executive vice president of community and regional financial institutions at nCino. “With nCino’s Bank Operating System, Bank of Southern California can more efficiently manage its growth, streamlining internal processes to save time and money while also providing more complete transparency and greater service to its customers.”
A growing community bank, established in 2001, Bank of Southern California, N.A., with headquarters in San Diego, Calif., is locally owned and managed, and offers a range of financial products to individuals, professionals, and small-to-mid sized businesses. The Bank’s solution-driven, relationship-based approach to banking provides accessibility to decision makers and enhances value through strong partnerships with its clients. The Bank currently operates seven branches in San Diego and the Coachella Valley in Riverside County. For more information, please visit http://www.banksocal.com/ or call (858) 847-4780.
nCino is the worldwide leader in cloud banking. With its Bank Operating System, built on the Salesforce platform, financial institutions can deliver the speed and digital experience that customers expect, backed by the quality and transparency that bankers need. Follow @nCino or visit http://www.ncino.com/.
REF: OTC Pink: BCAL / OTCMKTS:BCAL / PINK:BCAL / OTC:BCAL
News Source: Bank of Southern California NA