New beginnings, fresh starts, reaffirmations of love and promises for a brighter future all come to mind as we ring in a New Year. There are the superficial, yet purposeful, promises we make to ourselves. We resolve to get in shape, lose weight, improve career paths, and the like. Then, there are the heartfelt promises we make to others, whether aloud or in our minds. We want to care more, express love more, reverse bad feelings in old relationships or seek out new loving relationships. We try our very best to put these desires into words. Find the perfect words here! Choose among hundreds of genuine heartfelt Happy New Year wishes and greetings for your family, friends and loved ones.
Here’s to the New Year…
And all the promises
And hopes it brings!
As you sip your wine
Celebrating the New Year
Hope each day brings you
Showers of joy and surprises!
Happy New Year!
May your new year be blessed
with peace, love and joy.
Sending you my heartfelt wishes
With joy that never ends.
Wishing you a very
Happy New Year
Joy to your heart…
and warmth to your home!
As the New Year arrives…
Hope it brings along happiness,
hope and good tidings…
To stay on and on
Happy New Year
New is the year, new are the hopes and the aspirations,
New is the resolution, new are the spirits and..
Forever my warm wishes are for you
Have a promising and fulfilling New Year
Here is a wishing that the coming year is a glorious
One that rewards all your future endeavors with success..
Wishing you heartfelt and prosperous
Happy New Year
May each day of the New Year
Bring happiness, good cheer
And sweet surprises…
To you and all your dear ones!
Happy New Year!
New year is the time to bid farewell to the old
Year and welcome the coming year.
It is the time to forget and get past memories
That are no longer useful or worth pondering upon.
Let us
Forget and forgive
Happy New Year
As the New Year makes its way
Through the cold winter…
Sending you a warm ‘Hello’
and wishing you a
Happy New Year!
Wishing you a year of health,
wealth, happiness, luck, warmth…
And loads of love of your dear ones!
Hope the New Year
showers you with…
All that is beautiful!
Happy New Year!
May your world
be filled with warmth,
joy and good cheer…
Wishing you a
Happy New Year!
As the new year
renews all the happiness
and good tidings…
Hope the joyful spirit
keeps glowing
in the your heart…
Forever!
Happy New Year!
Didn't find what you were looking for?
If you liked what you read, please share it. It all helps to keep this site going!.