Middlesbrough live score (and video online live stream*), team roster with season schedule and results.'
Middlesbrough is playing next match on 20. Nov 2016 against Chelsea in Premier League.
When the match starts, you will be able to follow
Middlesbrough v Chelsea live score
standings, minute by minute updated live results and match statistics. We may have video highlights with goals and
news for some Middlesbrough matches, but only if they play their match in one of the most popular football leagues.
Middlesbrough previous match was against Manchester City in Premier League, match ended with result 1 - 1
Middlesbrough fixtures tab is showing last 100 football matches with statistics and
win/draw/lose icons. There are also all Middlesbrough scheduled matches that they are going to play in the future.
Middlesbrough performance & form graph is SofaScore
Football livescore
unique algorithm that we are generating from team’s last 10 matches, statistics, detailed analysis and our own
knowledge. This graph may help you to bet on Middlesbrough matches, but be aware of that SofaScore LiveScore accepts
no responsibility or liability for any financial or other loss, be it direct or indirect, as a result of any
action reliant on any of this website’s content.
In match details we offer link to watch online
Middlesbrough Chelsea live stream
sponsored by bet365. If this match is covered by bet365 live streaming you can watch Middlesbrough Chelsea
on your PC and on mobile - iPhone, iPad, Android or Windows phone.
Please note that
the intellectual property rights to stream such events are usually owned at a country level and therefore,
depending on your location, there may be certain events that you may be unable to view due to such restrictions.
Current Middlesbrough squad is:
Forwards: Emilio Nsue, Jordan Rhodes, David Nugent, Viktor Fischer, Alvaro Negredo, Gaston Ramirez, Carlos De Pena, Christian Stuani
Midfilders: Grant Leadbitter, Adam Clayton, Adam Forshaw, Stewart Downing, Marten De Roon, Julien De Sart, Adama Traore
Defenders: George Friend, Daniel Ayala, Husband, Bernardo, Antonio Barragan, Ben Gibson, Fabio, Calum Chambers
Goalkeepers: Dimitris Konstantopoulos, Tomas Mejias, Victor Valdes, Brad Guzan
You can click on any player from the roster on the right and see his personal information such as nationality,
date of birth, height, preferred foot, position, player value, transfer history etc. There are also statistics
for each player in all competitions with all total played and started matches, minutes played, number of goals
scored, number of cards and much more. Middlesbrough top scorers list is updated live during every match.
SofaScore
football livescore
is available as iPhone and iPad app, Android app on Google Play and Windows phone app.
You can find us in all stores on different languages searching for "SofaScore". Install SofaScore app and
follow all Middlesbrough matches live on your mobile!