85 mins: Blackburn clinging on, they somehow bundle it away after a deep cross. Looked like Sterling was getting on the end of that for a moment there.
83 mins: Coutinho into the box, he's like quicksilver. Blackburn's boys manage not to bring him down, somehow. He ends up firing into the side netting.
81 mins: Mario with a reasonable effort from the edge of the area. Now Henderson with a shot from a narrow angle. Neither shot was quite convincing.
79 mins: Rovers deffo giving the ref every chance. Baptiste here is pretty much undressing Balotelli as the ball comes in. Ref don't see
78 mins: Sturridge hunting that penalty like Glenn McGrath spying a fluffy antelope type thing.
75 mins: Lallana plays it in, Mario B is putting it about, Eastwood the keeper is lucky that a deflected ball comes within his grateful grasp.
72 mins: Been a lot more comfortablein the last few mins for Blackburn. Here's Sturridge though, running onto a long ball that Mario had helped on. Sturridge hits a first-timer well wide.
69 mins: Balotelli, the berk, has a shot from about a quarter of a mile away, and it's about that far over the bar as well.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Samuel_David - You can see where this ones going. They'll get a scrappy win, we'll all be told "it's their year" &amp;amp; "they're doing it for Stevie G" &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23FACup" target="_blank"&gt;#FACup&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
66 mins: Marshall off, Chris Taylor on for Rovers.
65 mins: Sturridge has hammered a freekick straight into the wall.
62 mins: Liverpool dangerous now, Blackburn clinging on. Conway is getting through a shift, some excellent defensive work.
58 mins: Markovic, pretty ordinary game, comes off and Mario comes on. Blackburn defend a set piece, but they've let Toure get away from them - he peels off, and hits the post with a header! Oh I think there was an offside.
55 mins: Risky. Very risky. Sterling with a darting run, slides it through to Sturridge. Kilgallon gets an arm across Sturridge, who makes a meal of it. Ref not buying
53 mins: Henley, studs up on Can, lucky not to see a card.
50 mins: Sturridge with a delightful bit of skill as he brings down a high ball with his left foot, and then hits it goalward with his right. Blocked.
48 mins: Corner comes in, Gestede meets it with a BEAST of a header. Mignolet with a super save on the line, not least because Lallana was getting in his way.
47 mins: Olssen and Marshall making a good show down the right. Liverpool break but then lose it, and Conway makes a darting run down the left. Good covering work from Can, at the expense of a corner.
46 mins: Right then. We're back underway. They announced during half time that Skrtl is ok.
HALF TIME: LIVERPOOL 0 BLACKBURN 0 Impressive from Blackburn, solid at the back and creating a few moments of alarm for the hosts as well. Gestede a handful. Liverpool haven't put it all together yet but have still had their chances, more due to individual flair than team moves. Eight minutes of injury time after a nasty injury to Skrtel.
45+ mins: There will be 8 minutes added. Sterling gets a sore one as he and Conway fight, fairly, for the ball. Markovic gets the ball on the edge of the box, has a shot near post. Regulation save. Lovren, who isn't having a very good game, fouls Gestede.
Into the fifth minute of the eight, and Liverpool have a chance to deliver a couple of balls. Dealt with quite well.
Liverpool haven't really got it all together as a team yet, but they have individual brilliance to fall back on. Sturridge receives the ball to feet, turns away from a couple of defenders and somehow manages to fashion a shooting chance. Thunderous strike with the left. Parried by the keeper.
Glen Johnson with a powerful run down the right. That's the last action of an extended first half.
45 mins: Can is going to get the game's first yellow. Lovren gives it away, Cairney surges forward, Can hauls him down and can have no complaints.
43 mins: Sterling frees Lallana who holds onto it for too long rather than taking the correct option, which was to play Sturridge in ASAP.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Michael Cox - With these teasing crosses, Blackburn seem determined to force one of the Liverpool centre-backs into a comical own goal&lt;/noframe&gt;
41 mins: Blackburn stand firm. Sterling is back in his own third, Blackburn making some progress down the right.
40 mins: But they've given it away now. Lallana breaks, looking for Sturridge with the high ball, Baptiste sorts it out.
39 mins: Blackburn enjoying a bit of the ball. Playing quite well.
38 mins: Gestede continuing to give these Liverpool backs a working over.
37 mins: Coutinho's had an effort well over.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Simon Hughes - Gestede's throwing himself at everything here. Like a latter-day Billy Whitehurst. No point in Liverpool moaning. Have to stand up to it.&lt;/noframe&gt;
35 mins: Sterling bombs down the left, good tackleHenley. Rovers deal with the resultant corner.
33 mins: Liverpool have a freekick from deep. Sturridge gets the flick on. It hits Gestede, who has got his arm out, on the hand. No penalty given, Kolo Toure smashes the ball into the net... but the offside flag has saved Rovers.
31 mins: Good chance! A move down the left from Blackburn, slid through, Gested steps over the ball and here is Conway arriving at pace from the right! Liverpool have a problem in that area - Sterling doing his level best as a wing back but I'm not sure it's quite the ticket for him. Conway hits the ball first time and really ought to have worked the keeper.
30 mins: Decent spell for the Championship side, but here come Liverpool again. Coutinho picks it up, twists this way and that, and fires over from the edge of the area.
27 mins: Cross from the left, Sterling bravely throws himself in front of the ball, the only way he can impede the lurking Gestede. The ball hits Raheeeeeem on the arm, but can't really see how you can call that deliberate.
24 mins: Gestede harrassing the Liverpool defence! He's gone quite close with a header. He's a powerful chap. Peter Emery writes:
Unfortunately sometimes long term effects of concussion can be more damaging than a broken bone. Let's hope this is not the case here.
23 mins: Conway making a nuisance of himself down the right for Blackburn. Sterling too greedy on the ball, loses it to Marshall. A ball is whipped in and Glen Johnson chests it behind, running at full speed. Excellent judgment.
22 mins: All Liverpool. Blackburn just have to hang on at the moment and hope they can keep it tight.
20 mins: Ball slid through by Markovic, Lallana is onto it, he is just about to pull the trigger when he is denied by a superb tackle from Kilgallon. Liverpool want a penalty, wrongly. What they get is a corner, which is delivered dangerously... but there's an offside.
18 mins: Coutinho has a shot, which is blocked. He gets a whack on the foot in the process.
17 mins: And Henley's problems continue, Sterling has turned him inside out and laid it across for Sturridge, who hits a shot. The ball pinballs around the area and very nearly goes in.
15 mins: Henley, at right back, has got his hands full. He gives the ball away badly, Henderson slides the ball through, Sturridge with a good run but he cannot quite gather it and Henley is a very relieved man as the keeper Eastwood gathers.
13 mins: Skrtel reports: bang on the head, nothing broken. Hope true, and that nothing wrong with head either.
12 mins: Freekick from deep, Blackburn loft it into the Liverpool box and Gestede has got some Jordan-esque* hangtime as he rises above Mignolet. Cannot direct the header.
* Michael, not Henderson.
11 mins: So: Sakho on, probably 10 minutes of injury time on the cards. Lets go.
10 mins: And now they are taking him off. Whatever it is, he is well enough to raise both thumbs up. Well played that man.
9 mins: They've got Skrtel onto the stretcher.
8 mins: They're still surrounding Skrtel. Players looking on, several of them look a bit worried
7 mins: Rodgers looking on, concerned.
5 mins: Goodness, he is still on the pitch getting treatment. At the very least, he is not going to take further part in this game. Sakho is stripped and ready to come on. Think Martin got a bang on the head as he went down - TV commentator suggesting he may have been knocked sparko but I am not sure either way.
3 mins: Skrtel goes up for a header with Gestede and has landed very heavily. Oof, that looked really sore. Some concern about him - lot of medics on. Hope he is okay.
1 mins: Liverpool kick off, excellent atmosphere, those Rovers fans making a great racket. Blackburn defending the Kop end. Early work for right back Henley, who marshalls Sterling well. Long diagonal ball, goal kick . Sterling thought it might have been a corner.
16.00 Blackburn's goal threat expected to come from Gestede, who has scored in the last two rounds of this comp.
Banner in the crowd urging the team to "get Gerrard to Wembley".
15.59 Looks like Emre Can will play in midfield. Michael Owen says Sterling will play "as a left wing back - and what a mouthwatering front three."
15.57 Players out on the pitch, handshakes. For Liverpool, no Gerrard. Glen Johnson and Markovic into the team. Moreno rested. Joe Allen's injured. I was just outside his restaurant yesterday. Didn't go in.
15.55 Here's how the BT bods reckon the teams will line up.
15.50 Lovely day up in Liverpool, sunny and mild, and they're saying on the telly that there are 7,500 Rovers fans there! Fantastic, what an effort. And well done to Liverpool for allocating that many tickets.
15.45 Love that picture of the FA Cup in the caff. Have you ever got your paws on a legendary trophy? They brought the Premier League pot around the office once in another paper I worked on. I think maybe here at Telegraph too. Impressive thing, close up. Still, the FA Cup is something else though, I would say.
15.40 So: are Liverpool the favourites for this trophy now? If not they, then who?
15.20 Some superb footage on BT Sport of the LAST time Blackburn won the FA Cup. Why, it was only the other day - 1928...
I am pretty sure that is King George in the hat. Hope I'm not wrong. That could probably get you shot at the Telegraph. And rightly so, what what.
15.15 The teams. No running around for Mario yet. He is on the bench.
Liverpool: Mignolet, Can, Skrtel, Lovren, Johnson, Markovic, Henderson, Lallana, Coutinho, Sterling, Sturridge. Subs: Ward, Toure, Lambert, Moreno, Sakho, Balotelli, Williams
Blackburn: Eastwood, Henley, Baptiste, Kilgallon (c), Olsson, Marshall, Evans, Williamson, Conway, Cairney, Gestede. Subs: Steele, Spurr, Brown, Rhodes, Taylor, Henry, Lenihan.
15.09 Here we go then.
15.08 Behold! The teams have arrived.
14.58 I love this picture from a cafe near Anfield. (Replica TBF but still)
FA Cuppa tea? Copyright: Michael Regan/Getty
14.56 A tweet arrives, and you know what, readers? It's from that man Michael Owen.
I fancy Liverpool for The FA Cup this year. Best team left in it on current form.
14.55 Amazing line from Mario Balotelli's agent as to why his client has taken so long to settle at Liverpool.
Mino Raiola, has offered an insight into why his client has struggled by saying that the player has never before been asked to work as much as he is on Merseyside.
He is quoted in The Mirror as saying: "Mario has found a coach who asks him things that had never been requested of him, including the fact of running without the ball.
"Right now I think Mario makes a very interesting development for his career.
That is a brilliant way of looking at it... no wonder he's looked lost - they want him to run around! Poor lad doesn't know if he's Arthur or Martha.
14.50 Teams are arriving at Anfield. I'll bring you details of the starting line ups as soon as ever I can.
14.35 Well, I've learned something today and I've only been here five minutes. A new word! Take it away, Alberto Moreno, interviewed by Jason Burt.
Alberto Moreno concedes there is a date that is writ large at Liverpool: May 30, the FA Cup Final — and Steven Gerrard's 35th birthday. If Liverpool reach the final it will be the captain's final game for them; it will Gerrard's send-off.
"The Spanish have a word 'crack' which means superstar, 'super-crack', it means megastar. Steven Gerrard is a 'super-crack'," Moreno says. "Since I was a boy I have watched Steven playing and now I have had the absolute fortune of not just being able to share a dressing room with him but to play and train alongside him.
"As a kid growing up he was one of my idols and this opportunity to play alongside him is something that I am never going to forget. It is something that will remain with me forever."
And winning the FA Cup? "It will be the perfect present for him, wouldn't it?" Moreno adds. "To be able to leave the club with a trophy under his belt, that would be fantastic for Steven.
Read more of Moreno: Gerrard is a 'super-crack'
14.30 Afternoon all, Tyers here. Welcome to our live blog of Liverpool v Blackburn Rovers (16.00 KO) Anyone fancy Rovers to spring a surprise? Let me know. With the other big teams busy with the League, do you reckon this might be Liverpool's year for Cup glory?
Preview: Alan will be here at about 3pm to bring you team news, build-up and then the match itself. In the meantime, enjoy the articles above and here's Timothy Abraham's match notes:
Blackburn have already knocked out two top-flight sides in Swansea and Stoke but might find it tough to make it a hat-trick on merseyside. Liverpol are in imperious form: they are unbeaten in the Premier League in 2015 and have not lost at home in all competitions since early November. However the last times the sides met in the FA Cup at Anfield, in Jan 2000, Natahn Blake scored to secure Rovers a 1-0 victory. Read more here