Blackburn Rovers live score (and video online live stream*), team roster with season schedule and results.'
Blackburn Rovers is playing next match on 19. Nov 2016 against Brentford in Championship.
When the match starts, you will be able to follow
Blackburn Rovers v Brentford live score
standings, minute by minute updated live results and match statistics. We may have video highlights with goals and
news for some Blackburn Rovers matches, but only if they play their match in one of the most popular football leagues.
Blackburn Rovers previous match was against Aston Villa in Championship, match ended with result 2 - 1
(Aston Villa won the match).
Blackburn Rovers fixtures tab is showing last 100 football matches with statistics and
win/draw/lose icons. There are also all Blackburn Rovers scheduled matches that they are going to play in the future.
Blackburn Rovers performance & form graph is SofaScore
Football livescore
unique algorithm that we are generating from team’s last 10 matches, statistics, detailed analysis and our own
knowledge. This graph may help you to bet on Blackburn Rovers matches, but be aware of that SofaScore LiveScore accepts
no responsibility or liability for any financial or other loss, be it direct or indirect, as a result of any
action reliant on any of this website’s content.
In match details we offer link to watch online
Blackburn Rovers Brentford live stream
sponsored by bet365. If this match is covered by bet365 live streaming you can watch Blackburn Rovers Brentford
on your PC and on mobile - iPhone, iPad, Android or Windows phone.
Please note that
the intellectual property rights to stream such events are usually owned at a country level and therefore,
depending on your location, there may be certain events that you may be unable to view due to such restrictions.
Current Blackburn Rovers squad is:
Forwards: Danny Graham, Anthony Stokes, Sam Gallagher, Martin Samuelsen, Marvin Emnes
Midfilders: Craig Conway, Corry Evans, Ben Marshall, Elliott Bennett, Jason Lowe, Danny Guthrie, Hope Akpan, Darragh Lenihan, Connor Mahoney, Liam Feeney, Jack Byrne, Willem Tomlinson
Defenders: Adam Henley, Elliott Ward, Ryan Nyambe, Steven Hendrie, Gordon Greer, Jack Doyle, Scott Wharton, Derrick Williams, Tommy Hoban, Charlie Mulgrew, Wes Brown
You can click on any player from the roster on the right and see his personal information such as nationality,
date of birth, height, preferred foot, position, player value, transfer history etc. There are also statistics
for each player in all competitions with all total played and started matches, minutes played, number of goals
scored, number of cards and much more. Blackburn Rovers top scorers list is updated live during every match.
SofaScore
football livescore
is available as iPhone and iPad app, Android app on Google Play and Windows phone app.
You can find us in all stores on different languages searching for "SofaScore". Install SofaScore app and
follow all Blackburn Rovers matches live on your mobile!