Norwich City live score (and video online live stream*), team roster with season schedule and results.'
Norwich City is playing next match on 19. Nov 2016 against Queens Park Rangers in Championship.
When the match starts, you will be able to follow
Norwich City v Queens Park Rangers live score
standings, minute by minute updated live results and match statistics. We may have video highlights with goals and
news for some Norwich City matches, but only if they play their match in one of the most popular football leagues.
Norwich City previous match was against Leeds United in Championship, match ended with result 2 - 3
(Leeds United won the match).
Norwich City fixtures tab is showing last 100 football matches with statistics and
win/draw/lose icons. There are also all Norwich City scheduled matches that they are going to play in the future.
Norwich City performance & form graph is SofaScore
Football livescore
unique algorithm that we are generating from team’s last 10 matches, statistics, detailed analysis and our own
knowledge. This graph may help you to bet on Norwich City matches, but be aware of that SofaScore LiveScore accepts
no responsibility or liability for any financial or other loss, be it direct or indirect, as a result of any
action reliant on any of this website’s content.
In match details we offer link to watch online
Norwich City Queens Park Rangers live stream
sponsored by bet365. If this match is covered by bet365 live streaming you can watch Norwich City Queens Park Rangers
on your PC and on mobile - iPhone, iPad, Android or Windows phone.
Please note that
the intellectual property rights to stream such events are usually owned at a country level and therefore,
depending on your location, there may be certain events that you may be unable to view due to such restrictions.
Current Norwich City squad is:
Forwards: Cameron Jerome, Steven Naismith, Josh Murphy, Kyle Lafferty, Carlton Morris, Nelson Oliveira
Midfilders: Alexander Tettey, Matthew Jarvis, Wesley Hoolahan, Jonathan Howson, Graham Dorrans, Jacob Murphy, Sergi Canos, Alex Pritchard, Youssouf Mulumbu, Ben Godfrey, Robbie Brady
Defenders: Sebastien Bassong, Steven Whittaker, Russell Martin, Ryan Bennett, Timm Klose, Martin Olsson, Ivo Pinto, Michael Turner, Louis Thompson
Goalkeepers: John Ruddy, Michael McGovern, Paul Jones
You can click on any player from the roster on the right and see his personal information such as nationality,
date of birth, height, preferred foot, position, player value, transfer history etc. There are also statistics
for each player in all competitions with all total played and started matches, minutes played, number of goals
scored, number of cards and much more. Norwich City top scorers list is updated live during every match.
SofaScore
football livescore
is available as iPhone and iPad app, Android app on Google Play and Windows phone app.
You can find us in all stores on different languages searching for "SofaScore". Install SofaScore app and
follow all Norwich City matches live on your mobile!