SEVE BALLESTEROS promised to return to Augusta next year - despite his worst ever Masters score just days before his 50th birthday.
The Spanish matador, playing here for the first time since 2003, had his 28th Masters appearance cut mercifully short as he followed his opening 86 with an 81 yesterday.
In his heyday, the double Green Jacket winner brought the Georgia course to its knees with his wonderful iron play and magical short game.
But although he showed the odd glimpse of his old touches around the green this year, his back injury, his lack of competitive practice and his age reduced him to a shadow of his former self.
His opening score was his worst in 92 rounds here - he was better than only one amateur in the 96-man field - as he hit just four fairways and four greens in regulation.
Despite improving yesterday, his 22-over-par total was equally sad. But Ballesteros, who turns 50 on Monday, looked content with his efforts.
"It was nice to be back and I played a good back nine today," he said. "Sure I will be back next year. I enjoy playing here - there is no reason not to come back. When I'm in Spain, I always think playing, I just lacked a bit of competition."
But yesterday he made two birdies on the front nine.
Then on the 11th, he hit a magical five-iron from among the pine cones under one tree and over the next before the ball settled pin high by the side of the green and he got up and down to save par.
But he found Rae's Creek for the second day at the parthree 12th. On Thursday, he caught his tee shot embarrassingly fat and his ball wobbled into the water.
Yesterday he seemed to make clean contact but his ball could not fight its way through a stiff breeze and fell agonisingly into the water.
A fierce look at his nephew, Ivan, blamed the caddie's club selection.
"I enjoyed certain shots. I felt comfortable. I was quite impressed by the way I held my nerve. I hit some nice shots but I used to play better than that."
Ballesteros returned to The Open for the first time since 2001 last year and did not rule out playing fearsome Carnoustie this July.
"We will see about Carnoustie. It is still a long way away. I go week to week.
I may play. I may not play."