Access to information on the internet is generally free from government interference in the United States. There is no government-run filtering mechanism affecting content passing over the internet or mobile phone networks. Users with opposing viewpoints engage in vibrant online political discourse and face almost no legal or technical restrictions on their expressive activities online. At the same time, recent revelations about the extent of government surveillance of online communications have led some to report an increase in self-censorship.
Although the government does not restrict any political or social content, legal rules that apply to other spheres of life have been extended to the internet. For example, concerns over copyright violations, child pornography, protection of minors from harmful or indecent content, harassing or defamatory comments, publication of confidential information, gambling, and financial crime have presented a strong impetus for aggressive legislative and executive action.
Advertisement, production, distribution, and possession of child pornography—on the internet and in all other media—is prohibited under federal law and can carry a sentence of up to 30 years in prison. According to the Child Protection and Obscenity Enforcement Act of 1988, all producers of sexually explicit material must keep records proving that their models and actors are over 18 years old. In addition to prosecuting individual offenders, the Department of Justice, the Department of Homeland Security, and other law enforcement agencies have asserted their authority to seize the domain name of a website allegedly hosting child abuse images after obtaining a court order.[29]
Congress has passed several laws designed to restrict adult pornography and shield children from harmful or indecent content, such as the Child Online Protection Act of 1998 (COPA), but they have been overturned by courts due to their ambiguity and potential infringements on the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which protects freedoms of speech and the press. One law currently in force is the Children’s Internet Protection Act of 2000 (CIPA), which requires public libraries that receive certain federal government subsidies to install filtering software that prevents users from accessing child pornography or visual depictions that are obscene or harmful to minors. Libraries that do not receive the specified subsidies from the federal government are not obliged to comply with CIPA, but more public libraries are seeking federal aid in order to mitigate budget shortfalls.[30] Under the U.S. Supreme Court’s interpretation of the law, adult users can request that the filtering be removed without having to provide a justification. However, not all libraries allow this option, arguing that the decisions about the use of filters should be left to the discretion of individual libraries.[31]
In addition to restricting access to universally illegal content such as child pornography, the government has in recent years started more aggressively pursuing alleged infringements of intellectual property rights on the internet. Since 2010, the Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) division of the Department of Homeland Security has engaged in several rounds of domain-name seizures, with targets including blogs and file-sharing sites that allegedly link to illegal copies of music and films and sites that sell counterfeit goods.[32] These seizures have been criticized as overly secretive and lacking in due process; for example, ICE seized the domain name of a legitimate hip-hop music site in November of 2010 and refused to return it for an entire year. The decision to withhold the domain was based on sealed court proceedings to which the owners of the domain were not allowed access.[33] In August 2012, three members of Congress wrote a letter to the U.S. Attorney General raising concerns about whether ICE procedures give websites meaningful due process.[34] However, ICE continues to pursue the project, which is known as “Operation in Our Sights.” In December 2013, ICE announced that it partnered with 10 international law enforcement agencies to seize 706 domains allegedly selling counterfeit goods to online consumers. The U.S. component of this initiative, called “Project Cyber Monday IV,” resulted in the seizure of 297 domains.[35]
The activities of WikiLeaks, which in 2010 published several tranches of U.S. government material that was leaked by U.S. Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning (formerly Bradley Manning), triggered a serious debate about the use of the internet to publicize sensitive or classified government documents.[36] WikiLeaks faced the cut-off of service by non-government entities, including Amazon’s data storage service[37] and EveryDNS, Wikileaks’ domain name service provider.[38] While these and other companies that severed ties with WikiLeaks claimed to be acting independently and without government influence, their decisions came amid fierce public criticism of WikiLeaks by executive branch officials and prominent members of Congress.[39] Manning pleaded guilty to some charges, was convicted of others and received a lengthy sentence in August 2013. According to a Washington Post article published in November 2013, government officials reported that while the grand jury investigation of Wikileaks is technically ongoing, it is unlikely that the organization’s leader, Julian Assange, will face charges in the United States.[40] Likewise, the Attorney General has said that the U.S. government would not prosecute Glenn Greenwald, the journalist who first published documents leaked by Edward Snowden, or “any journalist who’s engaged in true journalistic activities.”[41]
The legality of online gambling is another topic of debate in the United States. Online gambling is governed by a patchwork of state and federal laws. In 2011, the Justice Department delivered a legal opinion clarifying the scope of the Wire Act of 1961, which opened the door for states to legalize a number of forms of gambling, including online poker.[42] Following the opinion, Nevada, New Jersey, and Delaware legalized online gambling within their borders. Other states are considering similar legislation.[43] Some elected officials at the federal level oppose this trend. In March 2014, Senator Lindsey Graham and Congressman Jason Chaffetz introduced a bill that would reverse the Justice Department’s 2011 interpretation. As of May 2014, the bill had not progressed out of committee.[44]
In November 2013, the free expression and literature advocacy group PEN America released the results of a survey showing that the NSA surveillance revelations had resulted in increased self-censorship among writers. Since the revelations began in June 20013, 28 percent of respondents reported having altered or avoided social media activities, 24 percent reported deliberately avoiding certain topics in phone or email conversations, and 16 percent reported avoiding writing or speaking about a particular topic.[45] Additionally, Human Rights Watch conducted a survey of journalists and lawyers revealing the degree to which NSA surveillance has impacted their ability to communicate with sources and clients confidentially. Journalists reported that government officials are significantly less likely to speak with journalists than they were a few years ago due to concerns about anonymity and the ability of the intelligence agencies to access their communications information. Lawyers also reported facing increasing pressure to conceal or secure their communications with clients, particularly in cases with foreign governments or prosecutions that might spark an intelligence inquiry.[46]
The internet plays a significant role in civic activism in the United States, and the growth of the blogosphere and citizen journalism has changed the ways in which many people receive news. Blogs and electronic media outlets reporting from various points on the political spectrum now have greater readership than most printed periodicals. Nearly all nongovernmental organizations and causes have a presence on the internet and use it for advocacy and social mobilization. Email campaigns, online petitions, and YouTube videos have been instrumental in organizing protests, lobbying government bodies, and educating the public.
In 2011, technologists, digital rights advocates, companies such as Google and Mozilla, and the internet community at large came together to voice resounding opposition to two bills, the PROTECT IP Act (PIPA) and the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA), largely using online tools. SOPA and PIPA sought to target websites outside of the United States that host material allegedly infringing on U.S. copyrights. The bills would have permitted the Attorney General, with little judicial review, to seek orders directing ISPs to block access to domain names of sites allegedly dedicated to infringing activity, even if sites also contained lawful content. SOPA and PIPA threatened to suppress unquestionably legal speech and posed a threat to the infrastructure of the internet. Online mobilization against SOPA and PIPA was unprecedented: 10 million signatures to petitions, 4 million emails to legislators, and 115,000 sites blacking out or going dim in protest.[47] In response to these efforts and internal concerns, members of Congress withdrew the bills from consideration.
Political activity is increasingly moving online. According to a 2013 survey by the Pew Center’s Internet and American Life Project, 34 percent of adults had recently contacted a government official or spoken out in a public forum using online methods. In addition, 39 percent of American adults had taken part in a political activity using a social networking site like Facebook or Twitter in the 12 months preceding the survey. Groups looking to encourage political action frequently use online tools to contact Americans; in the Pew survey, 21 percent of email users indicated that they regularly receive calls to action on social or political issues by email.[48] In addition, political candidates and elected officials at the local, state, and federal level increasingly use email, mobile apps, and online content to garner support and keep their constituents engaged.