MARCOS ROJO: Forced to wait for his debut due to a delay in securing a visa, but the £16m buy from Sporting Lisbon looks to have benefited from extensive preparation on the training ground. Quick, tenacious and comfortable on the ball, the Argentina defender gave United balance on the left and energy down the flank.
DALEY BLIND: Signed by Louis van Gaal to play as a holding midfielder, the £13.8m signing from Ajax stood out by dominating the area in front of United’s back four. Hoovered up every loose ball and happy to sit deep, offering United the midfield security they have lacked since Owen Hargreaves arrived from Bayern Munich in 2007.
RADAMEL FALCAO: A sixty-seventh minute replacement for Juan Mata, the Colombian forward displayed non-stop movement along the QPR back line during his brief cameo appearance. And he almost capped his debut with a goal on 84 minutes when he pounced on a save from Blind’s 30-yard strike, only to see Robert Green to block his close range shot.
Encouraging stuff for United, although sterner tests await. Juan Mata, rather a nice chap I have always thought, presents the man of the match award to Di Maria, and translates for him. Both of them well pleased with their day's work, as they should be.
Henry Winter's match report is here. Thanks for following this one with us. Cheers.
90 mins: RVP down the left, pulls it back, but it's behind Falcao. Januzaj onto it though! Good crisp shot, but well parried. Now Januzaj down the right, men in the box, but he shoots wastefully over. I guess he feels that he needs something special to make his case for a starting berth.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Paul Hayward - If it carries on like that - and the money says it will - Old Trafford will stop being a place of anxiety and dread. Excitement's back.&lt;/noframe&gt;
89 mins: Evans with a sloppy back pass, leaves it short for the keeper. He, Blackett and De Gea have all made big mistakes in this game that might have been punished by better opponents. I'm not exactly claiming to be the first person to notice this, but the gulf in quality between the United forwards and the United backs is glaring.
87 mins: This game, I hardly need to tell you, has been over for some time and is winding down. Rooney decides he might have a snap shot from outside the box. Bobbling save.
84 mins: Blind has a dibble from outside the box, it swerves horribly through the air. Green beats it away. Falcao pounces on the follow up! Drills it low into the body of the keeper, who recovered very well to make the double stop. RVP was unmarked, incidentally, but Falcao never looked like passing for one nanosecond.
81 mins: Angel Di Maria, who appears to be suffering from cramp, comes off. Surely will be picking up the MoM award in a few minutes. He's replaced by Adnan Januzaj, who has not had much of a look-in since LVG arrived.
77 mins: QPR have been keeping it fairly tight since, erm, the fourth goal. Not trying too much, attacking-wise. Graham Smith:
United are certainly getting it together and I believe they will definitely end up in top 5.
76 mins: QPR have another decent chance, but they needed United to create if for them. Inexplicable leave of the ball by Tyler Blackett, Rojo joining him in some dithering. Eduardo Vargas screws his shot wide.
75 mins: 75,355 people in the ground. At least 70,000 of those could surely do better than this QPR shower.
74 mins: Quiet start for Falcao. An email entitled "message from Man U sponsor" arrives. It's signed by Ayaz Ahmadov.
Bakcell mobile operator in Azerbaijan is the sponsor of MU (regional). My opinion as a die hard United fan: we see some sexy football from MU. That's what we missed for a long time (even before Moyes time).
72 mins: Sandro's coming off, he's had a knock, and that nice Karl Henry is coming on.
70 mins: Falcao, urged to "give us a wave", obliges. Huge cheers. Rio is not so keen. An RVP cross kisses the cross bar.
68 mins: Rooney's clear! First touch good, second touch... not so good (if I may borrow from the great Sven)
67 mins: Looks like Rooney is going to play behind RVP and Falcao.
66 mins: Here he comes then, it's Falcao. He replaces Mata. Rafael also off, in favour of Valencia, which is perhaps not quite as exciting.
65 mins: Fer playing some nice stuff, but Kranjcar has wasted the moment by blazing over.
64 mins: Di Maria finds RVP, who shoots. Green, just for variety's sake, actually saves one.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Gary Lineker - Manchester United looking good but will face tougher opposition than QPR....such as the Dog and Duck!&lt;/noframe&gt;
60 mins: Sub for QPR, Eduardo Vargas for Charlie Austin. And now a rare chance for United to do a bit of defending. The impressive Daley Blind snuffs out an attack. From the resulting corner, Caulker heads way over. Gosh, still another half an hour to go. Not much fun for QPR.
GOAL! They don't need Falcao right at this moment, though, as United have got the fourth. Again it's Di Maria, in the inside left channel. He drills the ball across the goal, I think that might have been a shot actually, but it ends up being a pin-point pass for Mata. Rio's gone walkabout! Mata's in acres! Green goes to ground early, Mata chips him and that's the fourth. Man United 4 QPR 0 (Mata 58)
56 mins: The crowd burst into life as Falcao warms up. He's run up the touchline the wrong way for the warm-up. Inauspicious start. Tyler calls him "the great Falcao". I think that's a bit previous.
54 mins: Armand Traore with another strong run, cannot find a shot to match, but at least he's added a bit of energy for the visitors.
52 mins: United should have had the fourth! QPR all over the show, United have several men in the area. It's all gone a bit Arsenal though as they try to walk it into the net. Mata attempting an elaborate reverse pass to, I think, Rooney when he's about nine inches away from the goal-line.
48 mins: Traore soon effects QPR's best move of the match, winning the ball, storming forward, making a great run and then slipping it to Kranjcar. He shoots more or less s traight at De Gea.
46 mins: Eyes down for the second half. Can QPR improve at all? Armand Traore takes the place of Clint Hill, who has had a poor game.
16.56 Here's Mark Ogden with his verdict on the United new boys:
Marcos Rojo: Added real balance and presence on the left of defence. Showed a neat touch and tenacity.
Daley Blind: Deployed as a holding midfielder, the arrival from Ajax hoovered up any danger and looked the answer to United's problems in that position.
16.55 And here's a couple of emails. First up, Mark van Raaij:
Where does Falcao fit in? I predict Falcao will replace van Persie AND Rooney and he'll be better than those two combined. Give LVG place to play an extra defender and Man U the opportunity to win every game X-0 - just fill in the X by estimating how many good passes Di Maria can get to Falcao.
And here is Michael Drysdale:
Got the most terrifying attack in prem; however, three at the back doesn't sit well with the pace of the prem. Back four and no European distractions, we can win!
16.50 Bit of half time entertainment:
Here's Henry Winter with his views on Rio Ferdinand's comments about John Terry
HALF TIME: MAN UNITED 3 QPR 0 Just what the doctor ordered for United. Angel Di Maria ripping QPR apart, making one and scoring one. Ander Herera also opening his United account. Rooney with a neatly taken goal. Still, De Gea made a huge error at 1-0 and Matty Phillips ought to have scored. Even for a team low on confidence like they have been, the gulf in class means that it's really just a question of how many they want now. Join me in a few minutes and we'll find out.
GOAL! Well, that's that. A really neat move from United, and Rooney gets it on the edge of the box. Caulker stands off Rooney - you need to get a tackle in there, son! He gives Wazza far too much time and space, Rooney drills it hard and low, and Green has been beaten at the near post. Another decent bit of play from United, but QPR very much playing their part in this downfall. Man United 3 QPR 0 (Rooney 44)
44 mins: The United players are enjoying themselves, Evans spots that Mata has got the run on his marker at the back stick, but JE cannot deliver.
42 mins: Di Maria drifts the ball in, but there's just too much on it for Rooney.
40 mins: Game opens up for Leroy Fer, who has runners either side and time to pick his spot. Gives it away cheaply.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Andrew Thomas - Best thing about that goal was the discovery that Di Maria is quicker with the ball than Rooney is without.&lt;/noframe&gt;
38 mins: So Di Maria looks excellent, as well he might for 60 million quid. The rest of the players appear considerably more comfortable with this system. One should add the caveat that QPR have been utterly pathetic, but still.
GOAL! Di Maria is tearing QPR to bits down that left, slips it inside to Rooney whose shot is blocked. Bif of good fortune for United in that it breaks kindly for Herera at the back of the box. He has time to pick his spot and slot it home. "That is what United have been missing for the last 12 months, that pace from box-to-box," says Gary Neville. Certainly that run from deep down the left was Giggsian. Man United 2 QPR 0 (Ander Herera 35)
33 mins: Evans and Rafael burn forward, leaving themselves out of position. The move falls apart, and suddenly here is Junior Hoilett on the break. Robin Van Persie trips him, "taking one for the team", as Gary Neville calls it.
31 mins: De Gea makes a massive blunder with a regulation bit of clearing! Ball hoofed forward hopefully, De Gea comes out and fluffs his clearance, it's handed a chance to Phillips on a plate. Oh no. Awful shot, really should have done a lot better and that gift horse is currently rinsing out its gob with the purple water stuff. De Gea out again for another slightly iffy kick a few seconds later.
30 mins: Di Maria in the game again, bursting run down the left and cross for RVP. Cannot get up enough for the header.
27 mins: "We've seen some Angel delight here today," says Martin Tyler. Give me strength. If that's what's going to happen every time Di Maria scores... And when you factor in the "how do you solve a problem like Di Maria?" stuff.
25 mins: Herera reckons Hill has knocked him over in the box, but the well-placed Phil Dowd is not having it.
GOAL! They have created one now! Well, they have a goal, I think it's debatable whether this was a chance. Di Maria takes a freekick from the right, diagonal, about 35 yards out. He whips it in, QPR have men back... nobody really attacks the ball, it snakes between the centre backs and skips off the surface to bounce in at the far corner. United deserve the lead, but QPR will be annoyed to have gone behind like that. Man United 1 QPR 0 (Di Maria 23)
22 mins: Total dominance from United but they haven't really created much in the way of chances.
19 mins: But now they have a chance to pump a long freekick into the box. Cleared with ease by, I think, RVP.
16 mins: QPR harly been out of their half.
14 mins: Super work from Di Maria and Rojo down that left. Ball's lobbed into the QPR box, here's Herrera arriving like a freight train... Van Persie has nicked it off his foot just as he was about to volley! Wah-wah-waaaaaah. That was a let-off for QPR. Why didn't Herrera shout?
13 mins: Clint Hill chests the ball back to the keeper with Mata lurking, bit risky, but Rio nips in to tidy up. Ferdinand having an excellent game so far.
9 mins: Impressed by United so far. Blind directing operations from the base of midfield, the trio of Di Maria, Herrera and Mata all making their presence felt with neat, incisive attacks and runs.
6 mins: All United. Quick passing, looking menacing. This is more like the United we have come to know and largely hate. Krancjar pulled out of position, the ball's cut back, and Mata shoots over.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: dangerhere.com - Tyler on LVG: "Well he's a man of distinction and now a real big spender."&lt;/noframe&gt;
4 mins: Ferdinand in action again as he spots the danger early to usher RVP away from goal.
3 mins: Promising from United. Di Maria with a run down the left, spots the run of Mata. Good cross in, but a dangerous opportunity is sqaundered because Rooney's first touch is poor.
2 mins: Di Maria with a useful cross into the box, but Rio is assured in his clearance.
1 mins: QPR in white, and we're underway. It's United who enjoy most of the ball in the early exchanges. Sandro and Kranjcar both flying into tackles.
15.59 QPR will kick off.
15.58 A warm hand for Rio Ferdinand, who makes his 700th League appearance today, and is getting a commemorative plaque from Sir Bobby Charlton to mark the occasion.
15.56 Martin Tyler and Gurreh Neville are on the mikes. "First look at this expensive re-fit designed to put the Devil back into these Reds." Cripes, Martin. Steady on.
15.54 Kluivert: "LVG is calm before the match, he'll take a couple of individuals aside to have a word. He's not a shouter any more."
15.52 Hearing that both Kevin Pietersen and Geoff Boycott are at the game.
15.46 Visiting manager interview time! Harry's men will be working their socks off, not showing United too much respect, and very possibly going down the Strand and having a banana. I quite fancy QPR to get something. Unless LVG has stumbled upon a system that the players can actually play, rather than his enjoyably useless 3-5-oh-God-no-don't-kick-it-there-2, in which case they should give the West Londoners a good pasting.
15.45 Jamie Redknapp says that he thinks Falcao went to Monaco for 'financial reasons' but now he is at a club where he 'wants to be the main man'.
15.42 Here's Falcao being given a tour of Old Trafford by Sky TV's Shreeves. He looks like a decent lad. He seems genuinely awestruck by the dressing room. He has a hard time identifying a picture of the Class of 92, calling Gary Neville 'Phil'. I like him.
15.40 Oh look, a new Meerkat advert. Come, come nuclear bomb...
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Antoinette Muller - Time for the weekly bordering on giving myself an aneurysm as the English presenters insist Louis is going to fetch something. &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23GaalNotHaal" target="_blank"&gt;#GaalNotHaal&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
15.38 Jamie Redknapp: "With the players he's got here, I don't care what the system is, he should win."
That kind of sums up everything that's wrong with the English attitude to football and why our national team will alwyas suck, but whatever. Thanks Jamie. Your jacket is nice.
Maybe they should just do away with a manager altogether then, if it's all about the players.
15.35 Here's van Gaal on his formation. "My thinking behind the formation today is to beat the opposition. As always. I don't have five defenders to play with because they are injured."
15.31 Patrick Kluivert! Always looking slightly fatter in the face than one would think. The rest of him looks in good nick, perhaps he just carries his weight in his facial area. Like a hamster.
15.30 Who do you fancy, then? I mean, you'd have to think that United should be too good for the Superhoops, but there are certainly no guarantees with Man U at the moment...
15.29 Aaaaand we're back .Sorry about that. So yes! New United players! Old United players lining up against United.
15.18 Sorry there will be a short delay in our live blog due to techincal problems.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Samuel Luckhurst - Hint at 4-3-3 switch: Rafael hasn't played a competitive game since March and Van Gaal insisted Shaw wasn't fit enough for 3-5-2 in July.&lt;/noframe&gt;
15.12 Full teams, then
Man Utd: De Gea, Evans, Blackett, Rojo, Da Silva, Di Maria, Ander Herrera, Blind, Mata, Rooney, van Persie. Subs: Shaw, Falcao, Januzaj, Lindegaard, Fletcher, Valencia, Pereira.
QPR: Green; Hill, Ferdinand, Caulker, Isla; Sandro, Kranjcar, Fer; Phillips, Hoilett, Austin. Subs: Traore, McCarthy, Onuoha, Henry, Vargas, Zamora, Taarabt.
Referee: Phil Dowd (Staffordshire)
15.10 We will be paying particular attention to the newbies, and Mark Ogden will give his verdict at half-time.
15.07 And we also understand that United will use a back four. That little tidbit comes from Mark Ogden, who says that he just heard Van Gaal say such to Scandinavian TV!
15.05 And here are the QPR men who will take them on.
QPR: Green; Hill, Ferdinand, Caulker, Isla; Sandro, Kranjcar, Fer; Phillips, Hoilett, Austin
Referee: Phil Dowd (Staffordshire)
15.03 So no Old Trafford debut for the massive-wage Colombian, nor for Luke Shaw. We will, however, get a first look at Rojo and Blind.
15.00 Oh shame. Falcao is not starting. Here's the team as tweeted by Man United's official Twitter account.
De Gea, Rafael, Evans, Rojo, Blackett, Blind, Herrera, Mata, Di Maria, Rooney, van Persie. Subs: Lindegaard, Shaw, Fletcher, Januzaj, Valencia, A Pereira, Falcao
14.50 Our first email of the day comes from Tauya Rambakupetwa. Tauya, you have the floor.
I think Man United is going to do something great today. God Bless Man United!
14.40 Turning back to Rio for a second, here is an excellent and important column from Henry Winter on the Terry-Ferdinand affair, and what it tells us about modern Britain.
The most alarming material from the extracts of Rio Ferdinand's new autobiography is not the headline inferno about the two racism cases that scarred football in recent years: John Terry's an "idiot" and his shock over Luis Suarez's abuse of Patrice Evra. What is more troubling is Ferdinand's view on modern Britain where he feels that "racism has never actually gone away, it was just much better hidden than before".
As a window on modern Britain, the bigger picture described by Ferdinand is even more concerning than the individual grubby stains on the pane left by Terry and Suarez. Terry was acquitted in court of racist intent when making an on-field comment to Ferdinand's brother, Anton, but found guilty by the FA and banned for four matches. Suarez was suspended for eight games by the FA after being found guilty of making a racist remark to Evra, Ferdinand's then Manchester United team-mate. How weak those punishments were.
14.30 As a neutral, I have to say that it would be very funny indeed if the whole Old Trafford family did turn on each other in a massive multi-directional blame-culture row. Bryan Robson to fire the first shot?
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Samuel Luckhurst - Bryan Robson's turn at the ambassador's column this week. Maintains he was 'surprised' Welbeck was sold. Wonder if Fergie will ever pen one?&lt;/noframe&gt;
14.20 There's plenty going on in the QPR ranks as well. Here's Rio Ferdinand dishing on the breakdown of his relationship with John Terry. Cracking quotes.
Rio Ferdinand has revealed his deep animosity towards John Terry over the racism row that poisoned their England careers, claiming the Chelsea captain "will always be the biggest idiot".
Ferdinand admits he no longer speaks to Terry and Ashley Cole, as a consequence of the incident dating from October 2011 where Terry called Ferdinand's brother, Anton, a "f------ black c---" when Chelsea played Queens Park Rangers at Loftus Road.
"For me, the biggest idiot will always be John Terry," said Ferdinand, who regrets not being able to speak out at the time due to legal advice, in an extract from his autobiography #2sides in the Sun on Sunday. "As England captain and my centre-back partner he could have saved everyone a lot of pain by admitting immediately he used the word in the heat of the moment, but was no racist.
"I think that's probably what happened and what the truth is. Anton and I would've accepted that – instead he never gave us a chance.
"That was the betrayal. He tried to run away from what he had done.
"I've never actually spoken to John about the case. I no longer talk to him, but even three years later I find it impossible to forgive or forget the pain he put us through."
14.10 Of course, the thing we are all hoping for is the debut of Radamel Falcao. He has scored on his debut for every club he has played for (in Europe at least). If he does find the net today, he will join an illustrious list of greats who have scored on their Old Trafford debuts
Van Nistelrooy -- 2 v Fulham
Rooney -- 3 v Fenerbahce
Keane -- 2 v Sheff Utd
Charlton -- 2 v Charlton
Law -- 1 v WBA
Neil Webb - 1 v Arsenal (the best volley you've ever seen, hence the mention....!)
Thanks to our Manchester football guru Mark Ogden for these.
14.00 Afternoon all, Tyers here, and welcome to our live blog of Man U v QPR. I reckon this could be cracking entertainment. Either United will play well, and we can enjoy seeing how Falcao might agument what, on paper at least, is a remarkably talented attack... or United will suck, and everyone can enjoy picking that apart. To say nothing of the prospect of Rio lining up against his old club, or Joey Barton maybe doing something bananas. In short, it should be excellent.
Wayne Rooney is convinced Manchester United's new stars will bring the glory days back to Old Trafford. Radamel Falcao, Daley Blind, Marcos Rojo and Luke Shaw are all in contention to make their debuts on Sunday when QPR come to Old Trafford.
Harry Redknapp's side will also have to deal with British record transfer signing Angel di Maria and £29 million midfielder Ander Herrera, who has recovered from an ankle injury.
"Obviously last season we weren't good enough, so the time was right to go and get these top players to get us back to where we belong - to winning titles again," Rooney said.
"It's interesting times, exciting times, we have not had the best of starts, but we will come good."
Just how Van Gaal packs the six players into his team has been the source of much debate ever since the transfer window closed nearly two weeks ago.
Changing the 3-5-2 system he has used all season may be one way of accommodating his new stars.
Van Gaal made it clear on the pre-season tour of the United States that his long-term aim was to line United up in the 4-3-3 formation he has preferred for the majority of his successful management career.
The addition of Di Maria gives Van Gaal's squad more width, but the Dutchman may, at some point, have to consider dropping either Juan Mata or Robin van Persie.
Rooney thinks he, Van Persie and Falcao can operate together in a front three, but the United captain will be happy to play in whatever system Van Gaal chooses.
"Falcao is a great signing," Rooney said. "He could have gone to a number of other clubs but it's great we have got him. He is a world-class player so it's a great show of intent from the club and I am looking forward to working with him.
"Hopefully we will form a good partnership between him, myself and Robin. It's down to the manager how he chooses to play.
"With myself, Falcao, Robin van Persie, Di Maria, and Mata there is a great selection of players to pick from."
In his new role as captain, Rooney has taken it upon himself to make Falcao and the other new arrivals feel at home.
"I think there are certain things you have to do (as captain)," the striker said after captaining England to a 2-0 win over Switzerland on Monday.
"You have to make sure players are made to feel welcome and make sure they are aware of the history of the club.
"They will know that anyway but just in terms of the players make sure everyone is together, it's a lot easier to do that at your club because you are there every day. You spend more time together."
Van Gaal is without nine first-team players this weekend through injury. Falcao has only played 217 minutes for club and country since he returned from the serious knee injury that ruled him out of the World Cup, but he could be thrown straight into the team.
Join Alan Tyers from 2pm for all the build-up followed by live match commentary...