LA JOLLA, Calif., Feb. 15— 
George Burns won $240,000 in the Andy Williams Open golf tournament today. Craig Stadler lost $37,333.
Shortly after Burns had completed a dramatic, two-eagle final round that gave him a record-setting total, Stadler suffered a day-late disqualification that deprived him of a share of second place.
The disqualification came as the result of queries telephoned to tournament officials by television viewers who had watched film clips of the highlights of Saturday's play, a PGA Tour official, Glenn Tait, said, In one of those clips, Stadler was shown kneeling on a towel to play a shot from beneath a small tree on the 14th hole Saturday. The use of a towel in such a manner, Tait said, is a violation of the Rules of Golf and is considered ''building a stance.''
The violation calls for a two-shot penalty. Since Stadler did not assess himself that penalty, he was guilty of signing an incorrect scorecard for Saturday's round. And that calls for a disqualification.
Stadler, a playoff loser last week in Hawaii, was informed of the action after he had completed play today with an erratic 68 that included six birdies, an eagle, two bogeys and a double bogey.
It cost Stadler $37,333, the prize he would have received for being one of three players to tie for second.
Stadler was not available for comment.
Burns claimed the fourth victory of his 12-year PGA Tour career with a 72-hole total of 266. That 22-under-par score broke the course record of 267 set in 1977 by Tom Watson. Norman Winner by 9
MELBOURNE, Australia, Feb. 15 (AP) - Greg Norman shot his fourth straight under-par round today, carding a 3-under 70 to post a nine-stroke victory in the $200,000 Australian Masters golf championship. He won the event for a record fourth time, smashing the tournament record of 281 set by Bernhard Langer of West Germany in 1985. Seniors to Rodriguez
PALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla., Feb. 15 (AP) - Chi Chi Rodriguez, who had predicted he could catch Dale Douglass in the final round of the PGA Seniors championship, proved to be a prophet when he shot a 5-under-par 67 today to win the tournament by one stroke over the faltering Douglass. Rodriguez, the first-and second-round leader, ballooned to a 76 in Saturday's third round to fall six shots behind Douglass.
photo of Craig Stadler (AP)