Representing the top level of arena/indoor soccer in North America, the MASL features 23 teams each playing a 20-game slate.  The top teams from the former MISL united with teams from the PASL to form the MASL in April.
The season begins with the MISL champion Missouri Comets traveling to face the Dallas Sidekicks on October 25 and ends with two games on March 1.
The schedule features four October games, 52 November games, 56 December games, 72 January games, 44 February games, and two March games.
This year's schedule puts a heavier emphasis on divisional play, with teams facing each of their division rivals at least once home and away, but is not without intriguing long distance road trips.
The Monterrey Flash will fly west to play the Ontario Fury and Las Vegas Legends in November. Later in the month Ontario will fly cross country to visit the Syracuse Silver Knights and Rochester Lancers.
In late December Las Vegas will head south to meet the Saltillo Rancho Seco and Monterrey in Mexico.  In January the Harrisburg Heat will make the long trek to visit Ontario and the San Diego Sockers and the Wichita B-52s will hit the northwest to meet the Seattle Impact. Missouri will hit Saltillo and Monterrey in late January and Seattle will visit the St. Louis Ambush and the Comets in late February.
Also in February, the Baltimore Blast will visit Las Vegas before a highly anticipated game against the San Diego Sockers, a rivalry that dates back over 30 years.
The Comets will meet the defending Newman Cup champion Chicago Mustangs for the first of three matchups on November 8.  Both teams play in the Central Division along with the six-time champion Milwaukee Wave.
As the league heads into its seventh season - first under the MASL name - it has expanded from 20 to 23 teams and its regular season schedule has swelled from 160 games to 230.  The PASL played a 16 game schedule last year, while the MISL teams played 20 games.
"This is our most ambitious schedule by far," said MASL Commissioner Kevin Milliken. "Not only were we able to partner with some fantastic teams from the MISL, but we have five returning teams moving into larger facilities and we're adding the two additional home games, so our fans are going to be seeing a lot more of us and I have a feeling we are going to be seeing fans in record numbers, coming off a year when we broke almost all of our previous attendance records."
The complete schedule can be found at www.maslsoccer.com by clicking on the "Schedule" tab.