Come for an hour or two.
The third annual Gloucester Library Chess Club Tournament started Tuesday December 8th. There are eight adults and 16 children signed up to play in the two divisions. Defending champions Dr. Jeff Shields and Sonny Ray Allen are returning this year.
In the adult division, newcomer Dr. Erika McClean is likely to give all her opponents a challenging match. In the first round Dr. McClean will play Dr. Shields in what promises to be a tough match. The runner-up of last year's tournament, Mr. Stuart Richardson is playing Tony Copeland in the opening round. Mr. Copeland won the first game in the two out of three match-up with a come from behind victory on Tuesday night.
Mr. John Corrigan and Mr. Tony Freudig advanced to one of the semi-finals and will begin their match on the 15th.
The youth division promises to offer many close matches. Jonathan, Jesse, and Cassia Waldron all are strong players and will make it difficult for Sonny Ray Allen to repeat his victory this year. David Shields will also provide stout competition for any opponent and may produce a father-son sweep of this year's tournament.
The third annual Gloucester Library Fall Chess tournament has turned into a winter tournament. In the battle of the Doctors, defending champion Dr. Jeff Shields was able to win a difficult match with newcomer Dr. Erika McLean.  Erika will be a strong contender for the consolation round final.  In the other adult quarter final match Tony Copeland defeated last year's runner up Mr. Stuart Richardson in two out of three fast see-saw matches. Mr. Copeland will play Dr. Shields in the semi-final to determine who will play Mr. Tony Freudig who is waiting for his opponent in the final.
If you signed up to play in the youth tournament, please come to the chess club on Tuesday nights to keep the tournament moving along. Gift certificates are awarded to the winner and runner up........
The Gloucester Library third annual fall chess tournament has transitioned into the 2010 spring tournament. Matches were sporadic over the winter months but spring has brought a renewed vigor to the youth tournament.  Sonny Ray Allen has moved into the youth final after eliminating Jesse Waldron in two out of three tight semi-final games.  Jesse's big sister, Cassia is also playing a challenging match with David Shields in the other youth semi-final. The third and final game will determine who Sonny gets to play in the final match.  Mr. Tony Copeland is the champion of the adult tournament. He prevailed against Mr. Tony Freudig who resigned in the third game after being down a queen and in difficult position after Mr. Copeland unleashed a decisive queen trap.
What began as the 3rd annual 2009 Gloucester Library Chess Club fall tournament finished as the 2010 spring tournament.  It was difficult to coordinate everyone's schedules to get the matches lined up, but when they finally materialized, there were some great match-ups with unpredictable outcomes.  In the adult tournament, Mr. Tony Copeland, the youngest and most unpredictable competitor (can you say Bobby Fischer?) dispatched the rest of the adults with conviction.  In the youth bracket, Sonny Ray Allen repeated his outstanding chess performance, like he did last year, and won the final quickly and decisively.  Congratulations to the youth runner up Miss Cassia Waldron and to the adult consolation round winner Dr. Erika McLean!  The Gloucester Library Chess Club would like to thank The Friends of the Library for their continuing generosity towards our club.  We would also like to thank the staff at the library for their courteous help and friendship.