Fabian Delph was magnificent, a constant source of inspiration to accompany his non-stop running. He scored what proved the winning goal from an assist by Jack Grealish, whose talent Villa fans have always known about. Now the whole country knows.
Liverpool were poor until late on. Gerrard’s mind may be willing but the legs are weak and his last game in English football will not be the Cup final on his 35th birthday before he departs for LA Galaxy. Not every Hollywood script has a fairy-tale ending.
Like numbers? Like videos? Here are the key stats from Aston Villa 2 Liverpool 1
And here are five things that John Percy learned from the match.
Liverpool are paying the price for Brendan Rodgers's dreadful recruitment policy Rodgers is now the first Liverpool manager not to win a trophy inside his first three seasons since the 1950s and will face renewed scrutiny after this defeat. How he must wish he could turn the clock back to pre-season so he could spend the £75million received from Luis Suarez’s sale properly. For such a crucial game in the club’s season the pressure was on the likes of Lazar Markovic, Dejan Lovren and Mario Balotelli to perform but they struggled once again and the finger has to be pointed at Rodgers and his recruitment team. After last season’s achievements Rodgers deserves more time but he will face a renewed examination over his signings this summer.
Sherwood asked if this win will help in their relegation battle: "We've got the momentum now. And we've got an easy one next - Man City away. And they don't come easier than that! And the FA Cup Final will be a great occasion."
After being told that Mario Balotelli's "goal" was onside. "We robbed them!" Hashtag bants. And that'll do it. Thanks for reading.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: David Cameron - Congratulations to &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/AVFCOfficial" target="_blank"&gt;@AVFCOfficial&lt;/a&gt; on reaching the &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23FACup" target="_blank"&gt;#FACup&lt;/a&gt; final. A tremendous achievement.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Shay Given: "Support was amazing and we deserved to go through. The manager has instilled a lot of belief in the team. Captain Marvel today, was Delph, great for him to score the winner."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Danny Kelly - I've had my difficulties with Tim Sherwood, but you have to say... that is bloody well done. Hats off Tim, &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/AVFCOfficial" target="_blank"&gt;@AVFCOfficial&lt;/a&gt; and &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/StanCollymore" target="_blank"&gt;@StanCollymore&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
That's it! Villa have done it! Well done Aston Villa, they deserved that. They were dangerous on the attack, solid at the back. They had the game's two best players in the shape of Delph and Grealish. And Benteke was good as well. Sterling and Gerrard were as quiet as mice.
Four minutes of time added on. We've had two. Here's Sterling down the left, VIlla clear, Vlaar a rock back there. Here's Mario down the right. Lovren, the idiot, has tried a shot from 40 yards! "What is he doing?!" fumes Michael Owen. "All those men in the box, poor decision that."
Villa fans already celebrating, not sure that's wise... Here's Glen J, ball played out to the right, crossed in. It's Mario! With the header, tought one, a leeetle bit too high. Headed over. Moreno's coming off for Lickie Rambert.
Oh no! Shocker from the lino. Ball's played forward, Mario Balotelli takes it on his chest, holds off his man and sticks it away. Given offside. Incorrectly. "Shocking decision," says Michael Owen. But as Michael says, Mario often stands offside then runs back. An understandable error, IMHO, if a clear one.
Coutinho swings the ball in... Gerrard with the header! Cleared off the line by Richardson. Blah blah fairytale blah.
Gerrard corner. Lovren with another free header! He's not done much with that. Decent chance. Miles over.
Grealish is coming off. He's got unusually small shinpads. Socks rolled down. Hashtag lad. Here's Joe Cole.
Villa break from that and Benteke is only just squeezed out.
Steven Gerrard - he's got a birthday coming up, have you heard? - curls the freekick over the wall but it's easy pickings for good old Shaved Gibbon in nets.
Minor handbags leads to a freekick outside the Liverpool box. Couintho chopped down by Delph, in the eyes of the ref. But the Aston Villa fans think that Coutinho's bought one there. Anyhow, yellow for Gerrard.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Phil McNulty - Joe Allen off and Glen Johnson on. Can in his correct position - at long last.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Changes. Scott Sinclair on. Charles N'Zogbia comes off. For Liddypool, it looks like the boy Johnson coming on. He's got his top off. And can I just say: abs. Joe Alllen off. No secret cheeseburger today. Can goes into midfield.
What a shame. Coutinho's pass is utterly delightful, but both Mario and Raheeeeeem are just offside. Top work lino - inches in it.
Villa break from that! Benteke with a storming run, and he's stopped by a really superb tackle from Moreno.
Liverpool have a corner. Gerrard. Good delivery. Skrtel blocked. Drops to Allen. Great block Westwood!
Martin Skrtel, always a candidate, and Benteke involved in a bit of a disagreement because the latter, miles offside, tried to waste a bit of time, in the opinion of No Vwls.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Daniel Storey - Villa have been excellent, but still think might have been worth Liverpool playing with a right-back and/or central midfield.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Steven Gerrard can book that birthday bouncy castle after all at this rate.
Gerrard certainly hasn't got a handle of Delph, who is BOSSING this now. Another fine run, slips it to the overlapping, energetic Ricahrdson, whose cross is cut out.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: John Brewin - Backed Steven Gerrard to be booked. Still waiting for him to put in a tackle, to be honest.&lt;/noframe&gt;
This Grealish is on fire! He's quick, he's slippery and he's smart. He's linked up nicely with Benteke and Richardson here and he's only just denied clear water as he runs towards the Liverpool box.
Villa have been full of it since conceding, and so have their fans too," says the BT Sport man. Bit personal.
Liverpool are damn near back in it whern Can marauds down the right and slings a cross to Mario, who bundles it tamely wide with only the keeper to beat. Michael Owen says "Mario didn't fancy it" and indeed it did look like he pulled out of the challenge as the Villa keeper rushed out. Well, it was offside anyhow as it turns out.
GOAL! But Villa have done it! Delph with a jinky, clever run. Feeds Benteke. The striker holds things up and brings young Grealish into it. Grealish slips it to Delph, who has shown heart, determination and skill to continue his run - and Delph has finished the move he started with a super finish ASTON VILLA 2 LIVERPOOL 1 (Delph 54)
A period of nothing.
Gerrard, not having a game to remember, with a shot to forget.
Mario! Is rolling about on the floor and looking sad. N'Zogbia's picked it up in the inside right position and given a chap about 90 rows back a fright. David Prentice writes:
"I use a quote with the players, Per aspera ad astra, which is Latin for ‘through adversity to the stars’." It's this kind of thing that would see the Brodge get the thumbs down from me, Alan. A pint of bitter with Mr Sherwood for me.
Come now. Surely Tim is a Stella man?
Villa get us underway. There's soon a clumsy scramblr into the Liverpool box as they make a meal of a clearance.
The players are back out. Markovic has been replaced by Mario Balotelli. Interesting call from the Brodge.
And that is indeed the half. Villa rallied well after losing Baker to injury. Very smart move for their equaliser. Liverpool's opener came due to Villa sluggishness. Brendan needs to solve the Benteke problem during the interval. Sherwood can do some shouting. Not a classic game, but holding the attention. Anybody's guess who wins it. Philip Podolsky:
Aguero aside, Benteke is easily as good as any striker in the league but he needs to play for a Champions League club. If he stays at Villa he'll just get bored and it will be Diego Tristan all over again.
With the half coming to an end, it's Liverpool who are having more of the ball, although not going anywhere in particular with it. Steven Gerrard has been a nonny mouse.
Both sides something of a mixed bag, one or two haveing fine games but too many players - Gerrard, Allen, Cleverly, Sterling - having quiet matches for this to be declared a high quality team contest.
Up the other end though, it's a Liverpool break and, who else, it's young Coutinho who is wriggling some space for himself. Smarrt shot, corner. Fiasco with the Villa marking, they've all just wandered away and Lovren finds himself in acres. Ought to have done better with a free header.
Benteke not resting on his laurels, he's marauding down the left again and Liverpool are on the ropes here. Grealish nearly jinks his way through the area.
GOAL! But Villa are back in it! A superb run from Delph down the left, exchanges passes with the bright Grealish who slips it back to Delph. Fab then produces a pinpoint little past for Benteke, and the main man has tucked it away with real composure. Aston Villa 1 Liverpool 1 (Benteke 35)
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Phil McNulty - Liverpool ahead. Great calm among some penalty area chaos from Coutinho. 1-0.&lt;/noframe&gt;
GOAL! Aston Villa only have themselves to blame.They had ample opportunities to clear this, the big number five Okore is especially culpable, dwadling in the area when a good old fashioned boot was all that the occasion demanded. The busy Coutinho has pinched the ball and slotted it home. Deeply annoying for Villa, who have handed that goal over on a plate having had at least parity so far. Big deflection didn't help matters. Aston Villa 0 Liverpool 1 (Coutinho 30)
Bacuna with an important defensive header, Coutinho lurking unmarked at the back post. Corner is an acceptable price to pay. Especially as it is cleared.
Really nice move from, among others, Markovic and Coutinho stalls when Moreno's cross is intercepted.
It's Okore. Not Amore. Who comes on.
Oh dear, Baker's coming off.
Baker of Villa has gone up for a header, looks to have landed heavily on his feet.
From a freekick, Cleverly finds some space down the right, crosses, wins corner.
Good run from Tom Cleverly, into the box. Gerrard nearly fouls him.
Here's Raheem though! Racing into the box and goes down under pressure from Delph. No serious appeal for a penalty.
Sterling has thus far done nothing but get caught offside.
Bragging Rights klaxon from the BT Sport commentator. They're up for grabs in Milan later, you know.
I'd score the first quarter of an hour to Villa on points.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Kristian Walsh - Benteke pulling wide on to Can to compete in the air. Can was excellent at Villa Park but Benteke better so far.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Benteke looks in form. Strong down the inside left channel, nice flick, and here's N'Zogbia with a thumping shot. Deflected over for a corner. Cleared behind for a second corner. This one semi cleared but Villa are caught offside. Decent spell from Villa.
Talking of corners, Grealish has won one. Not properly cleared, and Villa have a good chance to feed Benteke, who has peeled away at the back post. It's a poor cross though.
Many thought that Benteke was offside as he charged onto this ball down the left, including (it seems) his Villa team-mates, because there's nobody in the box to help him when he tries to cross from right by the corner flag.
That lovely little magician Coutinho down the left, good run and clever timing on his cut back. Joe Allen! Poor shot, well over. Waste.
Markovic has done Richardson for pace on the outside right, Richardson curtails his progress with an arm in the chest. That's the second booking let-off. Even steven.
Grealish runs with the ball. Can rugby tackles him and is very lucky not to get a booking. An email from Robert Stewart:
Some managers do make some very odd statements.
Is he honestly suggesting that the biggest game in his career was the one that proved Swansea City really were the third best side in the Championship in 2011, and that that game always will be his biggest?
By that standard the game that persuaded Reading to let him go to Swansea, when they were one place above the relegation zone must have rated pretty highly too, as a career highlight.
Kick off! Liverpool in yellow. The formidable N'Zogbia looking to barrel his way through the Liverpool defences, Moreno stops him.
For those as prefers the words to the pictures, like so:
Aston Villa: Given, Bacuna, Baker, Vlaar, Richardson, Cleverley, Westwood, Delph, N'Zogbia, Benteke, Grealish. Subs: Guzan, Okore, Sinclair, Weimann, Cole, Gil, Lowton.
Liverpool: Mignolet, Can, Skrtel, Lovren, Markovic, Henderson, Allen, Moreno, Gerrard, Coutinho, Sterling. Subs: Jones, Johnson, Toure, Lambert, Manquillo, Borini, Balotelli.
Referee: Michael Oliver (Northumberland)
Players are in the tunnel. They should line up a little something like this.
It's Brodge! "We've arranged some games for Steven, on days like this you need your most experienced players and of course there are none more so than him. [As for Sturridge] we are just hoping he's alright, will just have to wait and see. Winning the FA Cup is the next step for us. We need to make that."
Roy Hodgson is speaking to BT Sport. "Steven Gerrard's return will be of enormous importance. But Villa have impetus of late. In a semi-final, you have your ideas as a manager but it often comes down to performance on the day. A lot of individual battles of interest today - Ron Vlaar and Raheem Sterling. Not the first forward Vlaar has dealt with, but Sterling is an excellent player".
Robbie Savage points out that Villa don't get goals from midfield and soi much of their goal threat depends on Benteke. A sensible point and well made too, Robbie. Do help yourself to a biscuit.
Steve McManaman: "If I was Liverpool, I would be targeting Jack Grealish early on - see if he has got the mental game to deal with the occasion."
Who do you fancy, then? Email alan.tyers@telegraph.co.uk with your views on today's game. Also: who would you rather go for a drink with: Brendan Rodgers or Tim Sherwood?
Here comes 'Tactics Tim' - can you imagine his smugness if Villa won today?!
Prior to today and giving Gerrard the nod, Rodgers had this to say: “Everyone respects that I always want to do what is best for the team, the collective, and always will. Status and star quality has never bothered me really.”
And the Aston Villa team is now with us too, here you are:
Aston Villa XI: Given; Bacuna, Vlaar, Baker, Richardson; Westwood, Cleverley, Delph, Grealish, N'Zogbia; Benteke.
Subs: Guzan, Okore, Sinclair, Weimann, Cole, Lowton, Gil.
So, Steven Gerrard starts!
Liverpool XI: Mignolet; Can, Skrtel, Lovren, Moreno; Allen, Henderson, Gerrard; Markovic, Coutinho, Sterling.
Subs: Jones, Johnson, Toure, Lambert, Manquillo, Borini, Balotelli.
Alan will be in at about 2pm to bring you all the action, but before then have a read of the articles above and the preview below.
Preview: Liverpool manager Brendan Rodgers knows his reign will be judged on trophies but even if he reached the FA Cup final he claims it will not be the biggest game of his career.
The Reds face Aston Villa at Wembley on Sunday looking to reach their first final since 2012, when they won the League Cup but lost the FA Cup to Chelsea.
However, Rodgers insists he has already managed in the biggest game of his career so anything else will not faze him.
"Swansea's play-off final was the biggest game for me and always will be so it is not about pipping it - it would be exactly the same if we were to get to a Champions League final," said Rodgers of his success with the south Wales club in 2011.
"I'd only been a manager a short time and I will always say it was my biggest game because it is a life-changing game.
"There are more prestigious games in football in terms of trophies but the play-off final, in terms of career and life and where it projects you to, is a big game.
"That game will always be the biggest game in my career but this game will be something different.
"We want to send the supporters home happy after arriving in another final.
"To win a trophy here with Liverpool is something very important.
"No matter what era you are in you will always be judged on trophies.
"We have made steps and we want to continue that by winning trophies.
"Hopefully, I'll be judged on my time here - however long that is - on that we've worked well and a part of that will be having won trophies."
Liverpool narrowly missed out on another League Cup final after losing to eventual winners Chelsea in a two-legged semi-final in January.
Rodgers hopes that experience will have helped his players as they look to book their return to Wembley on what will be captain Steven Gerrard's birthday and what would be his final appearance for the club before he leaves for the Los Angeles Galaxy in the summer.
"The players performed very well under pressure over the two games, and I think we were very unfortunate not to make the final," he added.
"What we have learned is that we want to play well and win. We have been fairly good at that but it will be about getting through. We want to concentrate on performance.
"But the learning taken from those two games is that we want to get through so even if we don't play as well and get through, that's what's important in cup competitions.
"You have to seize the moment. It's not a final, but it's a semi-final with an opportunity to come back.
"It is games like that where you write your name in the stars as a player, the big games.
"You want to make the big contribution and the big goals. If you want to be renowned as a top player, then you produce in the big games and that's what the good players will do.
"You can't take it for granted. You just never know in your life, and professional sport, when the opportunities arise again.
"So when it comes you have got to be ready to take it and that's something that I know the players are waiting and ready for."
Rodgers will welcome back centre-back Martin Skrtel from a three-match suspension and the Slovakia international will slot straight back into defence, either as a restored three-man back line or the flat four he has employed in the last two games.
"He's been outstanding this season," Rodgers said of Skrtel, easily his most consistent defender over the last 18 months.
"Whether we've played in a back-four or a back-three. In the last couple of years he's really come to the fore in terms of the team. It's great to have him back.
"The first six months when I came in here were difficult for him. He was having to adapt to a new way of working and playing. He didn't moan, he didn't complain.
"He sat in the office and looked through his strengths and the areas that he needed to improve on and he took that onto the training field and worked his way back in (the team)
"Since that moment, he's stayed in the team and been outstanding so he's a real strong character.
"He's a great player to have in your dressing room. His performance level this year has been outstanding." (Via PA)