Arsenal are Premier League leaders, for now, after dismantling rock bottom Aston Villa with two first-half goals.
Olivier Giroud opened the scoring from the penalty spot in the eighth minute after Alan Hutton brought Theo Walcott down in the box.
Aaron Ramsey added a second after a counter-attack that ended with the Wales midfielder being played in by Mesut Ozil.
I'll leave you with the Premier League table on this page but click here to join me for live coverage of Tottenham Hotspur vs Newcastle and here for live coverage of Liverpool vs West Brom.
For more post-match fall-out check the homepage but it's time to focus on the 4pm games. Cheerio.
169 - Petr Cech has now equalled David James' record for the most keeper clean sheets in Premier League history. Dazzling.
90+1min: Small reward for the supporters that have stayed though as Adama Traore sprints down the right before unleashing a low shot into the near post side netting. Unlucky.
90min: We are now into four added minutes as the Villa fans head for the exits.
87min: And now a final change from Aston Villa as Adam Traore replaces Scott Sinclair. The fight's gone from Villa now. If anything it's Arsenal more interested in finding the back of the net.
85min: Final change from Arsenal as Ozil departs in favour of Calum Chambers as the Gunners shore up the defence to see out the game.
82min: Villa's spark is going out now. Sinclair loses the ball far too easily to Ramsey. The midfielder picks out Ozil, whose cut-back eventually finds Oxlade-Chamberlain, with the sub forcing a near post save from Guzan.
79min: Well at least the Aston Villa fans have welcomed back Grealish. Following his breach of club discipline recently, the Villa crowd spark up with a loud rendition of 'Jack Grealish, he drinks when he wants.'
78min: Sanchez is ok to continue and Grealish finally comes on to replace Idrissa Gueye as Gil drags a low shot wide across goal.
77min: Grealish was getting ready to come on, but just as he was poised to appear, Villa have an injury concern.
Sanchez, wearing a face mask, appears to have injured an already fragile cheek following a clash with Giroud and has been forced to trudge off.
74min: The Villa attacks haven't quite kicked on since the double Arsenal change and time is running out. Jack Grealish is getting stripped down ready to come on for the hosts.
71min: And then another three corners! Villa eventually play it short and after fail to properly clear a cross, Idrissa Gueye slices a difficult volley over the bar from 23 yards.
70min: Hutton is too often finding space to attack the flank, as he runs on to a clever Veretout pass before seeing a cross headed behind for a corner.
67min: Those changes seem to have eased the pressure on Arsenal. The Gunners are starting to have more influence going forward again, although nothing like the sort we saw in the first period.
What's more puzzling is to see Aston Villa playing with a bit more confidence. It's almost as if they have to lose the game before they believe they can start playing. It's all rather bizarre.
64min: Arsene Wenger is looking concerned on the Arsenal bench and I don't blame him. The Gunners make a double change as Walcott and Joel Campbell are replaced by Kieran Gibbs and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain.
63min: Lovely football from Aston Villa. The hosts work the ball across the pitch to an unmarked Bacuna, who after taking a touch curls just over the bar with a shot across the box.
60min: What a strange game this is turning into. On the hour and Aston Villa have Arsenal camped inside their own half - even the Villa fans are engaged with this now.
Is Arsenal's midweek trip to Greece starting to catch up with them?
57min: Villa are enjoying a rare good spell in the game, but are the first to make a change as Carles Gil comes on to replace Gustede.
56min: This is much better from Villa. Hutton is again free on the overlap, but his cross is headed over the bar by Scott Sinclair.
53min: Arsenal get incredibly lucky at the back! Per Mertesacker's sloppy back pass is returned by an even sloppier return ball from Petr Cech.
Had Rudy Gestede managed to stay on his feet chasing it down, he would have been in with a shout of intercepting, but after slipping on the Villa Park turf the Gunners get away with it.
50min: Speaking of better attacking than defending, that brings us to Carlos Sanchez. The midfielder brings the ball down 30 yards out, before taking a touch forward and curling a shot towards the top corner. There is nowhere near enough power in it though as Cech collects with ease.
48min: Better from Villa. Alan Hutton's defending has been shambolic but his attacking play is improving at least, as he overlaps before centering a cross which Rudy Gestede glances wide.
No Jack Grealish at the start of the second half for Villa, not that it would make a difference according to Sky Sports pundit Graeme Souness.
Asked whether he though the Villa youngster could make a difference, the former Liverpool midfielder simply replied 'Jack who?'
Aaron Ramsey of course doesn't have a hat-trick, but he does have the freedom of the pitch.
The second goal summed it up really, he's winning tackles at the back and getting into good attacking positions. Aston Villa's midfield simply have not been in this contest and with the shackles off Arsenal it could get worse for Villa in the second period...
Here is Ramsey's first half heat map.
A 60-second hat-trick from Aaron Ramsey...very impressive.
Ignoring the minutes of the goal, I wouldn't be surprised if Arsenal do win this game 4-0 with a Ramsey hat-trick.
Well, they were 2-0 down to Arsenal at Villa Park on this day in 1998 before going on to win 3-2...
...but that team were in the title hunt, at least at the time, while this one is currently enduring one of the worst ever starts to a Premier League season.
A 2-0 scoreline is never a secure one, but after that first half , this one is about as safe as it gets...
Mesut Özil has 13 PL assists this season. Last Arsenal player with more PL assists in an entire season: Fabregas (14 in 2009/10). #AVFCvAFC
Here's what that does to the #BPL standings...
#AVLARS pic.twitter.com/glg3OOCbim
The half ends with the ball in the Aston Villa net but Walcott's ripper into the bottom corner is ruled out for a foul just seconds before the half-time whistle is blown and th ehome side are booed off.
44min: Just nothing Aston Villa do going forward actually works. A long pass to Rudy Gestede is flicked on down the line by the striker towards the flank, but none of his team-mates anticipate it as the ball rolls out for a goal kick.
41min: The Villa defending for the goal is totally unforgivable. As three Arsenal forwards bombed into the Villa penalty box, the likes of Carlos Sanchez were still jogging back and making minimal effort to actually help out their defence (what's left of it.) They even had a head start!
38min: Too easy for Arsenal. Aaron Ramsey wins the ball inside the Arsenal half to start a counter attack, which ends with Mesut Ozil squaring the ball for the Welshman to tap home into an empty net.
It's yet another assist for the German, but that will be one of his simplest this term.
35min: Ten minutes before half-time and while Aston Villa have at least limited Arsenal's attacking, they look so confident shot.
The passes are not coming off, the heads are dropping, the home fans are pretty much silent and they have a loud group of Arsenal supporter singing 'you're going down with the Chelsea' and 'that's why you're going down.'
32min: Half-chance for Aston Villa and that's being kind. Idrissa Gueye pounces on some Arsenal hesitancy 30 yards out to win the ball, but his effort from outside the box curls wildly across goal and wide.
Given Aston Villa's season so far - that may make the highlights reel in the end of season DVD.
30min: Do Aston Villa learn from any of their mistakes? Giroud has already got on the end of one Ozil free-kick and the combo nearly comes off again as the German's floated ball into the box is just missed by the striker.
29min: Arsenal are dominating this game, yet you get the impression they are still only playing in second gear. It's another free-kick to Arsenal as Mesut Ozil stands over 33 yards form goal.
27min: Hutton has a busy afternoon with Walcott by the looks of things. Having already conceded a penalty for fouling the forward, he then conceded a free-kick for a very similar incident outside the box.
24min: Minor hope for Aston Villa but nothing more. Jordan Ayew gets the jet pack on as he sprints down the left, but after cutting inside the box his shot is blocked before Arsenal clear.
21min: It's not just Guzan going on walkabouts though, Cech poorly punches a clearance straight at Leandro Bacuna, but having to react quickly the Villa full-back fires way off target with a first time volley.
20min: Where on earth was Brad Guzan? In short, nowhere.
Mesut Ozil shows Veretout how it is done from a set-piece as he clips in a free-kick but despite Giroud easily beating the onrushing Aston Villa keeper to the ball he can only nod the ball up in the air before the ball falls out for a corner.
Giroud's frustrated reaction after shows even he knows that was a good opportunity to score.
18min: Ironic cheers from the Aston Villa supporters as their side win a free-kick 35 yards out.
That's about as good as it gets though as Jordan Veretout's chip into the box finds no one before bouncing out for a goal kick.
15min: Not much response still from Aston Villa as Arsenal toy with them in possession.
9 - Giroud has now scored nine goals in his last nine away games for Arsenal in all competitions. Voyager.
12min: Arsenal fans are now chanting about being top of the league and the old '1-0 to the Arsenal' song.
In truth a 1-0 win could be a missed opportunity for the Gunners. Aston Villa look beaten already and this is a good opportunity for the Arsenal to pile on the goals and boost their goal difference.
50 - Olivier Giroud has now scored 50 Premier League goals. Golden.
Olivier Giroud becomes the 7th player and the third Frenchman (Thierry Henry, Robert Pires) to score 50 #BPL goals for Arsenal.
8min: It takes Olivier Giroud just eight minutes to make the breakthrough for Arsenal. Confusion reigns after Alan Hutton pulls down Theo Walcott inside the box, as the referee took a few seconds to award the penalty.
But it's the correct call and from 12 yards Giroud scores his fourth goal inside a week.
6min: Good start from Aston Villa. They have looked to attack Arsenal early on, with Scott Sinclair cutting in from the right before his low shot is easily saved by Petr Cech.
'The huge flag that was banned from the FA Cup final is held aloft by fans in the Holte End.
'The flag features a play on the Sex Pistols infamous album from 1977, Never Mind the B******s, Here's the Sex Pistols. It reads: 'Never mind the Arsenal here's the Aston Villa’.'
3min: I wouldn't have been surprised had Arsenal already been leading by now but Aston Villa have at least stood toe-to-toe with the Gunners in the opening moments.
The Holte End of Villa Park have unveiled a banner reading 'Never mind the Arsenal here's the Aston Villa.'
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more.
Quite telling that the loudest fans are the away ones as the teams make their way out on a miserable afternoon weather wise in the West Midlands.
A win for Arsenal today and they will go top until at least tomorrow when Leicester City have the opportunity to pinch top spot again at home to Chelsea.
For Aston Villa a win would only take them within three points of Sunderland in 19th - highlighting just the kind of trouble they find themselves.
4 - Olivier Giroud has scored in each of his last four appearances in all competitions against Aston Villa. Hero.
'I was quite happy about the way we played that game [1-1 draw at Southampton]. A point was a good result for us,' Remi Garde told Sky Sports.
'The team spirit is good. I didn't have too many possibilities but I'm happy with the team that starts.'
'Like all the players on the bench, Jack [Grealish] has good qualities. I'm happy he is back on the bench.'
It's difficult to predict if we are jaded or not so we start and see how everyone goes,' Arsene Wenger told Sky Sports. 'Sometimes after a good achievement the squad has a good level of confidence.'
'The job of the players is to show we can focus in every game. That's what maturity is about in a top level player.
'It is a team [Aston Villa] that fights for survival so you expect huge commitment and defensive security. On our side it's simply that we start strong and not raise their level of confidence.'
Failure to win for Aston Villa and they will go on their longest streak without a home victory in their history.
Concerning this fixture, they haven't beaten Arsenal at Villa Park for exactly 17 years. The omens are not looking good for Remi Garde's outfit.
No real surprises there, as Arsenal stick with the team that won 3-0 at Olympiacos in the Champions League, which means Theo Walcott is given another opportunity to build his match fitness at Villa Park following a calf injury.
Aston Villa without a home win this season, are unchanged form the team which fought well to secure a 1-1 draw at Southampton in the Premier League last weekend.
VIDEO: The @Arsenal squad arrive at a wet Villa Park for #AVFCvAFC. We'll reveal the team news at 12.30pm (UK time) pic.twitter.com/umtCKOcIOd
Cech, Bellerin, Mertesacker, Koscielny, Monreal, Flamini, Ramsey, Walcott, Ozil, Campbell, Giroud.
Here is the @Arsenal team for #AVFCvAFC pic.twitter.com/yRjlUhwwYf
Guzan, Hutton, Okore, Lescott, Bacuna, Gueye, Veretout, Sanchez, Sinclair, Ayew, Gestede.
Confirmed line-up: Villa team to face @Arsenal this afternoon, kick-off 1.30pm. #AVFC #AVLARS pic.twitter.com/02yGhhFUYC
Team news will be on the way next from Villa Park...
..for once those half-half scraves might actually come in handy.
Jordan Ayew and Joleon Lescott are the stars on the cover - though today I would guess the latter will be much the busier in the Aston Villa defence...
Here is today's official #AVFCvAFC matchday programme. pic.twitter.com/OH6Tlyq57R
...in what has to be one of the biggest mis-matches of the season so far.
After a heroic performance saw Arsenal secure a place in the last 16 of the Champions League midweek, the Gunners now take on a rabble of an Aston Villa team without a win since the opening day and on a crash course for The Championship.
Good afternoon all, welcome to Sportsmail's live coverage of Aston Villa vs Arsenal.
Follow Sportsmail's coverage of the Barclays Premier League as Aston Villa host Arsenal at Villa Park to begin Sunday's top flight drama.
Remi Garde comes up against the side he once played for when his Aston Villa outfit take on the Gunners, but his outfit go into the match a daunting eight points clear of safety and rock bottom of the table.
By contrast, Arsene Wenger's team have a golden opportunity to move to the summit above Manchester City and Leicester City at Villa Park where they haven't lost in exactly 17 years.