Pennsylvania Homeschoolers has led a continuing and successful effort
to keep Pennsylvania's compulsory school entrance age at 8 and, as a result,
Pennsylvania continues to be one of the only two states with such a high
From June 1991 to February 1994 Governor Casey tried to get bills through
both the PA House and Senate that would have lowered the age to 6. Through
our successful lobbying campaigns we were able to bottle up these bills
even though, during one period, both House and Senate were controlled by
Democrat Governor Casey's party. Then when Governor Casey retired we obtained
a campaign promise from Republican Governor Ridge not to raise the compulsory
school age. Here are some highlights from these successful campaigns.
On June 12, 1991, House Bill 1695 was introduced in the PA House of
Representatives. It passed out of the House Education Committee six days
later, and would have passed the House and Senate in June or July as part
of the budget compromise except for the efforts of homeschoolers across
the state who phoned, visited, and wrote their legislators. This bill would
lower the school entrance age from 8 to 6 and raise the exit age from 17
to 18. The PA Department of Education held that lowering the school age
would give school districts a tool to force "at risk" children
into school at age 6.
On October 16, 1991, PA Homeschoolers organized a lobbying day at the
state capitol so that homeschoolers could visit their state representatives
and senators to oppose this bill and give them fact sheets that we had
prepared.
A Harrisburg radio station estimated that about 300 homeschoolers were
in attendance at the lobbying day. Some very effective lobbying occurred.
Perhaps most important of all was homeschool leader Jim Means successful
meeting with Senator Rhoades, Republican Chair of the Senate Education
Committee, who decided, at the meeting, to shelve a companion bill that
he was about to introduce which would have altered the school age.
We held a press conference and rally in the Capitol Rotunda at 11am.
Karen Keckler, President of Concerned Women of America, and I, as co-editor
of PA Homeschoolers newsletter spoke at the Rally.
In my speech I took on the arguments being made by the PA Department
of Education. For example, I said:
The Department of Education has argued that the compulsory attendance
age must be lowered from 8 to 6 in order to protect 26,000 6- and 7-year-olds
who are currently not in school. According to the Department their goal
is to enroll economically disadvantaged, homeless, or migrant children
who are at- risk if not forced into school at age 6 or 7. This goal sounds
great. Everybody wants to help the homeless and the economically disadvantaged.
But would this bill really help them?
Let's look at the homeless. This bill would not effect them at all.
These children do not have homes or any other addresses where they can
be found by school census workers. It is almost impossible to force them
into schools whether they are under 8, or over 8. While it is laudatory
to promote a bill that would help homeless children, in this case it is
pointless.
Now let's look at the economically disadvantaged. According to the social
workers with whom I have talked, the economically disadvantaged already
send their children to school at 6. While it is laudatory to have a bill
that would help economically disadvantaged children, in this case it is
irrelevant.
So who are the 26,000 6- or 7-year-olds that this bill is designed to
save. Are they at-risk or are they doing just fine at present? I've come
up with two groups who comprise this 26,000 and they are both doing just
One part of the 26,000 are approximately 5,000 homeschooled children.
Their parents, and I am one, never ask for a penny of state money. But
we don't want the rules governing homeschooling to be made tougher without
our consent. We have long cherished the freedom that the eight-year-old
beginning school age gives to homeschoolers....
The other part of the 26,000 consists of children whose parents hold
them back an extra year before starting them in school. The Department
of Education may think that these children are at- risk, but the research
tells a different story....
I went on to describe the research into the "birthdate effect",
an effect found by Special Education researchers and discussed by homeschooling
pioneer Dr. Raymond Moore which shows that children who are young for their
grade when entering school are more likely to be labeled than students
who are old for their grade. The conclusion of my speech was picked up
in some radio broadcasts. I concluded:
Compulsory attendance laws, by their very nature, take away people's
freedom. They should not be expanded unless there is a very good reason
to do so.
The Department of Education has not yet presented any evidence that
expanding the compulsory attendance age would benefit a single child, while
I have presented evidence that this expansion would hurt many children.
If we are still a country that believes in freedom, we must fight this
completely unjustified attempt to expand the governmental control over
the right of parents to direct the education of their children.
After the lobbying day the effort continued. Several support groups
organized group meetings with their legislators and senators. For example,
Ingrid Wakeman, leader of the Easton Area homeschoolers support group organized
a meeting with Rep. Freeman at the Easton Public Library. Nineteen families
showed up. Both homeschool children and adults made presentations at the
meeting and it was covered by Cable TV. This was only one of many similar
meetings which occurred throughout Pennsylvania.
As a result of these efforts, HB 1695 was sent by the House leaders
to the Appropriations Committee where it was allowed to die at the end
of 1992. According to state representatives and their staff people it was
too controversial to be voted on during an election year.
In the election at the end of 1992, the Democrats took over the PA Senate
by a narrow margin and so a Democrat replaced Senator Rhoades as leader
of the Senate Education Committee.
On Thursday, April 29, 1993, I opened a letter from the Home School
Legal Association which included copies of Pennsylvania bills that might
affect homeschoolers. The Home School Legal Association routinely scans
legislation from around the country and notifies state homeschool leaders
of their findings.
The letter from the HSLDA came in the nick of time. (I saw God's hand
at work here.) If the letter came to me a few days later, it would have
been too late to stop the bill in the Senate. I immediately called my senator
and learned that the bill was set to be voted on early the next week. It
wasn't on Monday's calendar, so it would probably be voted on Tuesday May
I immediately wrote a letter to all of the senators which I got off
in the mail the next day. I included a Commentary that I had written
on Head Start in Education Week (October 21, 1992) the weekly newspaper
of the educational establishment. Many senators mistakenly believe that
the Head Start research justifies lowering the compulsory school entrance
age. My Commentary discusses the Head Start research and concludes
that Head Start programs "do not produce long-term gains in either
achievement or IQ."
That Saturday I called all of the support group leaders listed in our
newsletter (except a few in a part of Bucks County who currently have no
senator). I told each leader their senator's name, gave each leader their
senator's phone number and asked each leader to call ten of their members
and ask them to call their senator in Harrisburg on Monday afternoon.
The support group leaders came through. The next day, almost all of
the senators were getting dozens of calls. I wasn't able to go to Harrisburg
myself, so I also called several leaders and asked if they could go.
Some, including Barb Snider, Nancy Emerson, Chris Monroy, Janet Kipe,
William Day, Robert and Sue Rothermel, Chris Pfaff, and Bob Finley dropped
whatever they were doing and showed up at the Capitol over the next two
days. Chris Pfaff was new to statewide homeschooling leadership, but proved
that he was someone we could count on. Bob Finley, Barb Snider, and Nancy
Emerson, have proven their leadership time and time again and played major
roles in this battle just as they did when our homeschooling bill passed
in 1988.
Four teens from Chambersburg were especially effective lobbyists. Jennifer
Snider, Rebecca Snider, Lydia Hudzinski, and Brian Kipe went from office
to office in the Capitol winning over senators, their assistants and secretaries.
We continued to send out phone tree messages over the next few days,
and tried to concentrate our lobbying efforts on key Democratic senators
since the Democrats control the State Senate with a narrow majority. Soon
the leadership of the Senate realized that they did not have enough Democratic
senators with them to pass the bill unless they could arrange a compromise
with the homeschoolers. So, they postponed the vote for a week.
On Thursday, May 6th, I received a phone call from Bob Feir, a former
top official in the Department of Education who was now a staff person
in Senator Lincoln's (the Democratic majority leader's) office. Bob Feir
proposed a compromise with me which would have changed the homeschooling
law at the same time that the compulsory school law was changed so that
homeschooling parents with children under 8 would not have had to do much
more than file an affidavit.
He faxed me his proposal, and we discussed it. As soon as I hung up,
I called the Home School Legal Defense Association and faxed them the proposal.
I also called other homeschooling leaders. Fortunately, the state-wide
Lancaster Curriculum Fair was scheduled for the Farm Show Arena on Saturday,
May 8th. I got in touch with Bill and Kay Lechner and they agreed to arrange
a meeting at the curriculum fair where homeschooling leaders could discuss
the proposed compromise. My main hope was that homeschoolers could stay
united, whether we decided to accept or reject the compromise.
The meeting at the curriculum fair in the Harrisburg Farm Show was democratically
run by Bill Lechner. He gave everyone who asked a chance to stand up before
the group and present their position. There was a lot of good wisdom represented
at the meeting. Some of those who could not attend, including Mary Hudzinski,
sent letters which were read by many of those who attended the meeting.
Despite the fact that there were more than 50 leaders present, we were
able to reach what was almost a consensus. Michael Geer's comments were
especially helpful in helping us reach an agreement. There were very few
hands raised against it when we put it to a vote.
A committee was quickly set up with the job of communicating our position
to Bob Feir and the senators by Monday. After they received our position,
the Democratic leadership decided to table the bill by putting it back
in the education committee.
On May 24th I received the following letter from Senator Frank Pecora,
one of the Democratic senators who responded to our lobbying effort. Senator
Pecora has long been a friend of homeschooling and an advocate for the
family. He wrote:
Thank you for your recent inquiry into Senate Bill 724 -- a measure
expanding the compulsory school attendance from six to eighteen (from its
current range of eight to seventeen).
As you may know, Senate Bill 724 passed through the Senate Education
Committee and was on its way to final passage at the end of April when
a public outcry halted its progress. The bill has since been re-referred
to the Education Committee where it is expected to remain indefinitely.
In fact, there is some reason to believe that the bill may not be acted
upon at all.
In the event that SB 724 is released from the Education Committee, I
will introduce an amendment exempting home schoolers from the bill's provisions.
Clearly, I will not support SB 724 in its current form, and will certainly
take into consideration your position if and when this measure comes to
the Senate floor for a vote. Thank you again, and if I may ever be of further
assistance, please don't hesitate to contact my office.
We didn't hear any more about the bill until the Senate Education Committee
scheduled a discussion of it for Monday, February 14, 1994. We found out
about the scheduled discussion just in time to mount a quick lobbying campaign.
Many homeschoolers called their senators. Chris Pfaff went to Harrisburg
to lobby in person. Most of the Republican Senators were on our side, and
most of the Democratic Senators were against us.
But the meeting and all other Senate activities were suddenly canceled
to prevent the Republicans from taking over because at the same time in
Bucks County a Federal Judge was ruling that the Democrats had stolen a
Bucks County election. (I saw God's hand in the timing here.) As a result
of the Republican victory in court, the Republican Senators suddenly outnumber
the Democratic Senators by 26 to 24. They regained control of the Senate
and the Senate Education Committee when the Senate came back into session.
As a result Senator James Rhoades, the new Republican Chair of the Senate
Education Committee who had been on our side all along, never let it out
of his committee and it died at the end of 1994.
In November 1994, a new governor was elected. We were able to get both
of the major candidates (Democrat Singel and Republican Ridge) to answer
our questionnaire about their position on the compulsory school age.
Both positions were published in the August 1994 issue of the PA Homeschoolers
newsletter. Specifically we asked them: "What are your positions on
the proposals for lowering the compulsory school entrance age to age 6
and for raising the compulsory school exit age from 17 to 18?"
I do not support any changes in the state's compulsory attendance laws
to either lower the school entrance age or raise the exit age. Pennsylvania's
current entrance age requirement gives parents a great deal of freedom,
as it appropriately should, as to when their child is ready to begin school.
Maintaining the current law's requirements is consistent with maintaining
that parental freedom.
I will carefully evaluate any bill which may have an impact on the education
of children in Pennsylvania. Everything that a child learns in and out
of the classroom can be a learning experience, and we must insure that
parents are given as many options as possible regarding the education of
their children. Furthermore, we must be sure that children are adequately
prepared for the next step of their education.
These replies contributed to Governor Ridge's support from the homeschooling
community in the election. Throughout Governor Ridge's term, no bills were voted upon that would have
changed the compulsory school age.