90 min + 3 Elsewhere:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: FFW - FT Lille 1-1 Krasnodar. Not the greatest result to start the competition, but a good comeback from a goal down.&lt;/noframe&gt;
90 min + 2 De Bruyne fires the ball in from the right towards Hunt in the box. Hunt can't control it brilliantly and as he goes to knock it past Howard in comes Jagielka with an excellent sliding tackle to knock it behind.
90 min + 1 There will be four additional minutes, including this one.
GOAL! Everton 4-0 Wolfsburg (Mirallas 90) A lovely pass from Eto'o, as he nutmegs Naldo with a neat reverse pass. Mirallas runs on to it and outpaces Knoche, then rolls the ball past the keeper. That's the kind of clinical football Wolfsburg have lacked.
88 min A break while Coleman has treatment, but he'll carry on.
86 min Rodriguez again crosses from the byline down the left but it's scrambled away and McGeady steps neatly through two tackles to launch a counter-attack. Left he swings it to Barry, who was up in support, but his pass back out towards McGeady on the flank is cut out by Naldo.
84 min Good work from McGeady to win possession out on the right flank and Gibson goes on a driving run into the box. He hits a low, curving shot along the floor that the keeper gets down well to smother. A minute later, Eto'o tees up McCarthy on the edge of the area and his shot goes comfortably over.
83 min Yet another shot from 20 yards by De Bruyne, the ball worked to him after a lovely lay off from Bendtner. He looks to curl it into the top corner but it's deflected wide. Naldo heads the corner a long way off target.
81 min It's just settled down a bit now after that hectic half hour following Everton's third. Although as I say that Jagielka sends a loose pass back towards his own goal and Olic is nearly there, McCarthy covering well.
Also I've just noticed that Eto'o is wearing five. That's just wrong. Naismith is off, Darron Gibson on.
79 min Rodriguez scampers to the byline in the box and pulls it back on to the head of Bendtner, who heads straight at Howard. 11 saves now for the American tonight.
78 min A nice ball into the area from deep by Rodriguez finds Olic running into the channel. Howard comes out and Olic goes round him, but Jagielka forces the striker wide and the shot is into the side netting.
74 min Canny work now from De Bruyne to step inside on the edge of the area and curl a shot towards the far post, but Howard gets down well and gets the faintest of fingertips on it. From the ensuing corner, Everton break upfield but Mirallas's cross from the left is cut out by Rodriguez on the edge of the area.
73 min Eto'o rolling back the years here. He receives it on halfway, holds it up and steps away from a tackle, turns and picks out Naismith with a lovely left-footed diagonal pass. The Scot cuts inside from the left and, although his initial pass is blocked, he gets it to McGeady inside the area. The winger curls it over though.
72 min Mirallas gets a yellow now, muscling Arnold off the ball, being penalised and then lumping the ball away. Fair enough, I guess.
70 min Naismith concedes another free-kick, this time tangling with Knoche in the centre circle. He's already on a yellow card. Bendtner makes a burst down the byline and pulls back a very good cross from the byline, Olic powering a header straight at Howard.
69 min Lukaku's night is done: he's replaced by Samuel Eto'o.
67 min The ball is played in by Olic on the left. He passes back to Arnold buut he powers straight at Howard from the edge of the area. There's a fould though when it's cleared and Wolfsburg have a free kick out on the right, 25 yards out. Ooh and it's a great strike from Naldo, who curves it hard, over the wall and into the side netting.
My girlfriend is watching The Shining, I think:
All work and no play makes dan a dull boy. All work and no play makes dan a dull boy. All work and no play makes dan a dull boy. All work and no play makes dan a dull boy. All work and no play makes dan a dull boy. All work and no play makes dan a dull boy. All work and no play makes dan a dull boy. All work and no play makes dan a dull boy. All work and no play makes dan a dull boy. All work and no play makes dan a dull boy.
66 min It's headed clear and Hunt drags down Mirallas.
65 min Coleman finds McGeady on the righthand side of the area. The Irishman steps back inside and welts it miles wide. Then Jagielka concedes a corner with a dreadful long-range backpass that Howard can't keep in.
63 min A poor cross from Rodriguez isn't properly cleared by Stones and Arnold shoots from range. It's blocked behind for a corner by McCarthy. The ball pings out again and again Arnold shoots, but it's blocked. It's all Wolfsburg now. Except they're losing heavily.
61 min Off comes Caliguri and, to a chorus of boos, enters the greatest striker in the history of English football: Nicklas Bendtner! The man with the ego of Zlatan Ibrahimovic and the footballing talent of someone, well, a lot lot worse.
59 min Everton come forward on the break and find Mirallas in space wide on the left. His delivery is poor though and although Lukaku can reach it, it's down in the right hand corner and the move breaks down.
56 min Actually I may be doing Howard an injustice there, that's a great save. He's called into action again now as Barry passes straight to Rodrguez. The left-back passes it low into the area and the ball breaks to Hunt, Howard coming out to smother it before the German international can get a shot away.
55 min Rodriguez curls it left-footed over the wall and Howard makes a good, if showy save, diving to his right and parrying it one-handed.
54 min Naismith goes into the book for a clumsy lunge at Luiz Gustavo. Free kick 20 yards out, just to the right...
53 min Now the visitors pass it around down the left. It's worked inside and a nice pass into the channel from the impressive De Bruyne finds Caliguri, whose low shot from inside the area is saved by Howard's legs. It falls to Luiz Gustavo who takes a touch and shoots low from eight yards but Howards gets down wel to save. Good work from the goalie.
51 min A corner to Wolfsburg as Howard palms away Olic's snapshot. In it comes and it's played out to De Bruyne, who monsters a shot from 20 yards into the side of Jagielka's head. Oof. It comes back out and Arnold drills low and wide from just outside the area.
50 min Nice work from Wolfsburg here as Caliguri picks it up on the inside left of the area and finds Rodriguez with a backheel to the byline. Howard gets down well to cut it out.
48 min I'd say penalty was the correct decision there. It was a dreadful pass for Knoche to deal with and McGeady picked it up. The foul started outside the box, unquestionably, but it was one of those tangled trips, where the two players' legs get entangled, and was still going on as McGeady twisted into the area.
GOAL! Everton 3-0 Wolfsburg (Baines pen 47) Thumped low into the bottom righthand corner and the keeper goes the wrong way. Game over?
46 min Penalty to Everton! A poor pass and McGeady nabs the ball on the edge of the box. He's felled by Knoche outside the box, falls inside and the referee points the spot after asking his assistant.
21.08 Here come the players. Wolfsburg have made a change, Aaron Hunt replacing Malanda.
20.53 And with that, it's half time. Everton will be delighted with that performance after a cagey few minutes. Wolfsburg look a decent outfit, crisp and organised but not short on creativity, and Roberto Martinez will be delighted with the way his side have pressed them hard and dominated in midfield.
GOAL! Everton 2-0 Wolfsburg (Coleman 45+1) Everton have the ball on the left near the byline and Mirallas steps back inside, into the area and he powers a shot at goal. Benaglio parries it into the path of Baines and he knocks it across the face of goal for Coleman to head in.
44 min Great work from McCarthy to win the ball in midfield for Everton and he finds Naismith in space 35 yards out. The Scot looks for his strike partner Lukaku but underhits the pass and it's cut out by Naldo.
42 min Ooh! It's a really good effort from Lukaku, up, over the wall and dipping toward the bottom corner but Benaglio gets down well to save.
40 min Lukaku plays a nice ball up to Mirallas, who slips returning the pass but Lukaku gets dragged down dead centre, 30 yards out...
39 min One for the good cause dept., in response the horrible happenings up in Manchester the other week. Go on, it's even worth putting up with Northern Uproar (who once threatened to beat me up).
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: RYAN JARVIS - &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23ManchesterDogsHome" target="_blank"&gt;#ManchesterDogsHome&lt;/a&gt; fundraiser. all dayer gig this Sunday. Can we get RT/Mention pls? &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/GNev2" target="_blank"&gt;@GNev2&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a href="http://t.co/3cvwxHLccs" target="_blank"&gt;http://t.co/3cvwxHLccs&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
36 min McGeady, 30 yards out, finds Mirallas on the left of the area with a good diagonal pass but Mirallas's cross is aimless. Elsewhere in the group, Krasnodar, who I thought was a Game of Thrones character, have taken a surprise lead at Ligue 1 leaders Lille.
34 min Olic does well to chase down a ball on the left touchline, keep it in play and run into the box. He heads for the byline then checks and knocks it back for De Bruyne, but the Belgian's low, left-footed shot from distance is easily held by the diving Howard.
33 min Half a shout for a penalty to Everton as Lukaku flicks Mirallas's pass into the path of Naismith down the inside left. He nods it into the box and goes down as Malanda comes back, but the referee rightly says no dice.
31 min Oh what a wonderful pass from Mirallas, from halfway in the middle out to Coleman on the right touchline. It's the kind of pass Steven Gerrard has wet dreams about and deserves better than the poor cross straight into Rodriguez that Coleman delivers.
29 min Coleman is found wide on the right and Everton flood players into the box. In comes one of those crosses across the six yard box that looks really cool but isn't actually in the least bit threatening when, as is the case here, no one is anywhere near it. Down the other end Rodriguez gets some space and hits a much better cross from deep, but Howard comes out to collect well.
28 min McGeady is robbed of possession by Naldo on the edge of the Wolfsburg area and the German side come forward. A diagonal ball finds Olic on the right but he's crowded out by Jagielka and shoots well wide.
26 min Elsewhere tonight, Celtic drew 2-2 in Salzburg. Who knows? This might be the last time a British newspaper mentions a Celtic result.
25 min A loose pass from Baines is picked up by Olic, who lets fly with a low drive from 20 yards but Stones gets across to make a convincing block.
23 min Speaking of McGeady, who was so impressive for the Republic of Ireland last week, here's an email from John McEnerney.
Hi Dan, perfect stage for McGeady to show his class, he's finally showing the class that was well known he had but hadn't shown. He matured during his spell abroad & now is the time to show what he can do.
21 min Chance for Caliguri as he's found with a wonderful cross from the left and Howard holds his volley well. Everton race down the other end and McGeady finds Mirallas on the right. The Belgian cuts inside and pulls back to McGeady, whose shot from the edge of the area is blocked.
20 min Everton break and it could easily be 2-0 here. Barry has options either side, 20 yards out, and opts for Lukaku on the right. He takes a touch, goes round the outside but then slips and scoops his shot over the bar, via a deflection off his own left foot.
18 min That goal kind of came from nowhere, it was Everton's first real attack. They need to be watchful here though as Luiz Gustavo drives forward and, given space hits a firm shot from distance that Howard beats away.
GOAL! Everton 1-0 Wolfsburg (Rodriguez og 15) This really is Steven Naismith's goal. He bursts through midfield and exchanges passes with Baines. The latter goes down the left of the area and knocks it inside for Naismith, whose shot is blocked on the line by Ricardo Rodriguez. Only then the tumbling defender gets in a tangle and knocks it over his own line.
13 min Lukaku wins a corner with another run down the lefthand channel. It's taken short and Mirallas whips in the cross, but Naldo thumps a header clear.
12 min Lukaku against Naldo looks to be a fascinating battle of the strongmen. It's the Brazilian veteran who has won both of their encounters so far, first coming across to cut the striker off out wide and now standing up strongly to him as Lukaku looked to turn.
10 min Wolfsburg very much on top at the moment. They're passing it around patiently around 30-odd yards from the Everton goal and it's important that the home side don't do anything rash. They don't and eventually De Bruyne pings a 25-yard drive well over.
8 min Excellent from De Bruyne. Wolfsburg come back and the midfielder finds Knoche with a lovely pass. Knoche dribbles across the area and gives it back to De Bruyne, whose sweetly struck shot hits the first defender. That was a gorgeous pass though.
7 min Malanda wins a corner for Wolfsburg, coming away from a tangle of bodies in midfield to make a strong run down the left. His cross is blocked and it goes behind. The corner falls for Olic but he can't connect with the shot and it's cleared.
6 min Rodriguez is robbed of possession on halfway by Lukaku, but as the Belgian looked to get something going the whistle went for a foul.
4 min Excellent pressing from both sides in midfield, with no one being allowed to spend any time on the ball.
2 min A low-key first couple of minutes, with first Everton then Wolfsburg giving it away, Everton then content to retain possession at the back. It's good to see a full-strength Everton team. Stones, playing centre half here rather than at right back as he did for England, gives it away to De Bruyne but the former Chelsea man slightly mistimes his pass into Olic on the left of the box and the striker is flagged offside.
20.06 A minute late, we're off! And Everton's Twitter did a funny!
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Everton - Due to UEFA regulations, Z Cars will be played at a slightly different time this evening. &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23EFCvWOL" target="_blank"&gt;#EFCvWOL&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
20.02 Time for a quick word from Jordan Dowling before we begin:
Interested to see the Everton team. they have a small squad but i think they should really give the Europa Cup, even if it might mean not finishing 6th-7th next season
I agree, especially given the winners of this will qualify for next season's Champions League, as it should be. It's good to see that Uefa are offering a greater incentive to actually try and win a cup, which is what this sport is all about, than to finish one or two league places higher.
19.59 Hello folks! Five minutes until kick-off; here are the teams in full. Let's hope this is more entertaining than the Spurs snoozefest, eh?
Everton: Howard, Coleman, Baines, Stones, Jagielka, McCarthy, Barry, Mirallas, McGeady, Naismith, Lukaku.  Subs: Joel, Gibson, Alcaraz, Eto’o, Besic, Atsu, Osman.
Wolfsburg: Benaglio, Caligiuri, Olic, De Bruyne, Malanda, Luiz Gustavo, Jung, Naldo, Arnold, Knoche, Rodriguez.  Subs: Grun, Bendtner, Schafer, Klose, Hunt, Guilavogui, Klich.
19.11 Team! &lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Everton - Everton XI to face Wolfsburg: Howard, Coleman, Baines, Stones, Jagielka, McCarthy, Barry, Mirallas, McGeady, Naismith, Lukaku. &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23EFCvWOL" target="_blank"&gt;#EFCvWOL&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
16.11 “Fast kickin’, low scorin’”. I nicked that from The Simpsons wrote that in my preamble for the match before this one and whatever happened (you’ll see from the timestamp that I’m writing this ahead of time) those are two things that we generally associate with the Europa league. Not so with Everton under Roberto Martinez though.
Last season saw the shackles of the David Moyes era cast away like Manchester United’s title top four top six hopes. The free flowing, high-scoring attacking feasts have been souped up although the early fear is that Everton may have tipped the balance between attack and defence a bit too far. For the neutral this is great, as anyone who watched their absurd 6-3 defeat to Chelsea will testify, but a 2-2 draw with Leicester on the opening day and throwing away a two-goal lead against Arsenal to end with the same scoreline are far from ideal.
I’ve got a box of facial wipes to hand, because Everton’s opponents tonight are German so, as a sports writer, I am contractually obliged to slaver over them. Wolfsburg have been similarly unconvincing to Everton this season, with draws against Frankfurt and Hoffenheim far from ideal although their opening day result, defeat to Bayern, is one of the least surprising things that has ever happened.
Everton are unbeaten in five games against German opposition, while Wolfsburg are without a win in their last four European away matches. The visitors tonight do feature a couple of players with Premier League experience though: Kevin de Bruyne used to be registered in Chelsea’s squad and, according to urban legend, got a game or two for them. They also have Nicklas "The Rubbish Zlatan" Bendtner, who played George Costanza in the long-running Premier League sitcom Arsenal for nine years.
Kick-off is at 8.05pm BST. I’m going to go out on a limb here: not only do I fancy Everton to win this one, but they’re worth a punt at winning the whole thing.