Seve Ballesteros had shown remarkable consistency in the majors since winning the Open in 1984 – earning eight top-10 finishes in five years – but at the start of the 1988 Open the doubters still lined up to question his ability to add to his four major titles. Two days before play began, Ron Wills wrote in the Mirror: “The golden touch has deserted him since capturing the 1984 Open title at St Andrew’s and now the swashbuckling Ballesteros has been relegated down among the also-rans in the major championships.”
Oddly enough, Wills backed Ballesteros in his preview the next morning, but his words were hardly a ringing endorsement for the bookies’ joint favourite. Ballesteros and defending champion Nick Faldo were both 8/1, with Masters winner Sandy Lyle at 9/1. Ballesteros was upbeat about his prospects: “With the special feeling I have here – this feeling in the blood – this could be the time I win another major.”
The Americans were less fancied. Of the US contingent, Paul Azinger and Curtis Strange were at the shortest price, at 14/1. Europe’s Ryder Cup captain, Tony Jacklin, didn’t rate their chances, saying: “I can’t see beyond a European winning here this week. Why? Because we in Europe have the better players. I suppose Curtis Strange is among the top three players in the world at the moment but the conditions here will not favour the Americans.”
Partisan perhaps, but Jacklin’s opinion was also backed up by Tom Watson. Lanny Wadkins was not impressed, replying: “Tony has obviously got too patriotic.” Even in a non-Ryder Cup year, relations between Europe and America were a little strained.
On Thursday 14 July, Seve teed off at 8.54am and was out of the blocks fast. Three birdies in the first three holes and another on the sixth sent a ripple of anticipation through the record first day Open crowd of 35,191. The one blip in Ballesteros’ round came at the 14th, where he was forced to take a two-shot penalty after finding a bush. Still, a four-under-par 67 in the first round had sent out the message that he meant business.
The Express headline of “Super Seve stands out in a crowd” was apt: Nick Faldo finished level par, blotting his round by bogeying the 17th and three-putting the last; Sandy Lyle dropped three shots in the last four holes for a 73; Curtis Strange carded a poor 79, hardly ramming Jacklin’s words down his throat (he would subsequently shoot three sub-70 rounds, but the damage had been done).
The best placed American was Brad Faxon, who had only qualified for the tournament the previous Monday and was now tied for second with Australia’s Wayne Grady on two under par. Only four other golfers broke par – Australians Peter Senior and Noel Ratcliffe, American Don Pooley and Zimbabwean Nick Price – who were all on one under par.
If round one had belonged to Seve, it was Nick Price’s turn to take centre-stage on the Friday. Price, who had thrown away a three-shot lead with six to play at the 1982 Open in Troon, equalled Ballesteros’ Thursday score of 67, and sounded in a determined mood for the weekend ahead: “I learned a golden lesson at Troon and one which I hope to work in my favour this time. If, when I’m 50 and retire and haven’t won an Open, I’ll never forgive myself.” Price finally lifted the Claret Jug in 1994.
At the halfway stage, Ballesteros sat one shot behind Price on four-under, after a level-par round on Friday. Naturally, the great man showed his excellent skills of recovery once more, holding par with a chip and a putt at 17 and then hitting an equally impressive bunker shot and putt at the last. Faldo, who was warned by officials for slow play, carded a 69 to share third place with Craig Stadler, who had gone round in an impressive 68.
Sandy Lyle brought himself back to within five shots of Price, shooting a 69, and despite of Jacklin’s jibes, the Americans were actually faring reasonably well: Andy Bean had played the back nine in four under par to sit in fifth place on one-under, and Bob Tway and Fred Couples were both on level par with Lyle. Of the big names to miss the cut, it was hardly unexpected that Lee Trevino and Jacklin fell by the wayside, and other casualties included future champions Mark Calcavecchia and Ian Baker-Finch, as well as past major winners Larry Mize, Hal Sutton and Ray Floyd.
Another record crowd of 43,111 had turned up to see Friday’s action, but fans were left deflated and disappointed on the Saturday as torrential rain washed out any hope of the third round finishing on the day. Under European rules, as less than half of the players had concluded their rounds, all scores were discarded (no one completed 18 holes on that miserable Saturday).
The Americans in the field were hit the hardest: Hubert Green had birdied five of the first seven holes to bring himself back to within five of Price; Corey Pavin birdied three of the first seven; Paul Azinger three out of six; and Tom Watson birdied two of the first four. Rules are rules though, and with the ninth, 10th and 11th greens completely flooded, there was nothing that could be done.
Initially the R&A hoped to play 36 holes on the Sunday, though further bad weather scuppered that plan. For the first time in Open history, the championship would have to be played to a finish on the Monday, which was hardly ideal for TV companies, players of fans, but under the circumstances the only possible solution to the problem. Players were to be sent out in three-balls to speed things up a bit, which made things much more exciting.
The Sunday saw the British challenge gain a head of steam. Nick Faldo again improved on his previous round, claiming five birdies in his 68, although inevitably he ended up bogeying the 17th again. Sandy Lyle matched Faldo’s five birdies, and with just the one bogey, his 67 put him right back in the hunt.
Price showed no signs of nerves, his round of 69 increasing his lead, as Ballesteros went round in a steady 70. Seve’s round of course wasn’t without incident, as the par-five sixth hole saw the Spaniard play two shots left-handed from a bush and escape with a relatively good bogey six. Birdies at 7 and 13 put Ballesteros within two shots of Price, and set up a mouth-watering final day.
As for the rest of the field, Craig Stadler’s hopes were buried with a triple bogey at the par three 12th, his mood unlikely to have been improved when he was heckled at the 17th (“These people should be ejected and told not to come back”, said Peter Alliss on the BBC). Stadler’s fellow American, Lanny Wadkins, was in a slightly better mood after acing the par-three first, and England’s David J Russell created a stir by going out in 29 (six under) to move to two under for the tournament, although sadly it couldn’t last: a bogey at 10 was followed by a double bogey at 12 (after going out of bounds and hitting a car bonnet in the process), and a bogey at 14 took the wind out of Russell’s sails. His 69 was a game of two halves; 29 for the front nine and 40 for the back.
At the end of round three, it looked as if the Open would be won by one of four men: Price -7, Ballesteros -5, Faldo -5, or Lyle -4. Of the four, Price was the only one of them yet to win a major and three Europeans did not miss an opportunity for some mind games. “Nick has handled it today, but this was only the third round and tomorrow it will be different,” said Ballesteros, with Lyle adding: “Nick’s bound to feel the tension while Faldo, Ballesteros and myself have all won this championship.” Price was measured in his thoughts, rightly pointing out that “tomorrow is the big day and I know that everything will be decided on the last nine holes.” Wise words, and very prophetic.
Hopes of a third home victory in four Opens were understandably high before the commencement of the final round, although as things began to unfold it soon became apparent that the 1988 Open would be decided in a two-way shootout between Price and Ballesteros. The seventh hole saw Faldo’s chances recede, as his par was easily outstripped by eagles from Price and Ballesteros in their three-ball group. Ultimately Faldo would not play badly, but his lack of birdie putts did for him. A year before, his level-par 71 saw him home at Muirfield, but with Price and Ballesteros in sparkling form a repeat was never in the question in 1988. His third-place finish was a brave defence though.
Lyle’s birdies at 7 and 8 boosted his chances, until he was knocked off track slightly by a bogey at 9. And then the wheels fell well and truly off; coming home in 40 was sadly a precedent of what was to come for Lyle in subsequent years. He would miss the cut in his next two majors and his form fell away so alarmingly that he didn’t make the 1989 Ryder Cup team. An unfitting end for such a fine player.
Price’s perception that the Open would be decided on the final nine holes was as precise as some of the iron play executed by both leaders. With the tough back nine to come, Ballesteros had pulled back the two-shot deficit, scoring three birdies and an eagle in the process. Even though this was a strokeplay event, effectively it would boil down to a matchplay contest between the pair, something that suited Ballesteros, what with his four World Matchplay wins between 1981 and 1985. If Price was expected to fold, he was doing a good job of silencing his critics, as both he and Ballesteros contributed to one of the most enthralling back-nine finishes in Open history.
After 11 holes, Ballesteros edged into the lead for the first time as yet another birdie was too good for Price’s par. But just as Seve’s fans were starting to believe, the equilibrium was restored on the 12th, as a Ballesteros bogey ended his superb run. And then to the drama of the 13th: Ballesteros would birdie the hole, but that only tells half the story. Price played an immaculate approach shot and was inches away from an eagle (you can see how close Price’s ball was to the hole in this clip, as Seve’s ball lands on his approach to 13). Seve nonchalantly rolled in his putt and any possible momentum that Price may have gained with his sublime approach shot was nipped in the bud.
The co-leaders bogeyed the 14th and exchanged pars on the 15th to set the scene for one of the great moments in Seve’s career. Hole 16 was already synonymous with the double Open champion; his incredible birdie from the car park in 1979 has gone down in Open folklore. In 1988 he clipped a gorgeous 135-yard nine-iron to within inches of the cup. It wasn’t quite the clincher but he later said it was “the shot that won it for me”. In hindsight it was the moment that finally broke Price’s resistance, although with only a one-shot lead and two holes still to play, the engraver was hardly getting to work just yet.
The one-shot lead stayed intact as both players stood on the last tee. Ballesteros must have hoped that a par would be good enough for his third Open and all looked good as his tee shot clung on to the light rough just to the right of the fairway. His second, however, did not find the green, ending up again in the light rough, and with a third shot that would test the nerve of any man. Price had managed to safely hit the green, albeit 45 feet from the hole. As Seve stood over his chip, Price knew that his only realistic hope was for the Spaniard to take three to get down.
What followed was yet another moment of genius. As Ballesteros flopped the ball on to the putting surface, it soon became apparent that he had delivered yet again. His delicate touch sent the ball rolling ever closer, and just as it was slowing down, it kissed the lip of the hole in a moment of pure golfing theatre. It was, as James Lawton pointed out in the Express, a shot “fashioned in the golfing heavens”. Ballesteros’ face contorted in a cocktail of emotions – relief, ecstasy and joy – and he now had one hand on the Claret Jug.
Price could still tie with him, but it wasn’t meant to be. His birdie attempt whizzed by and he somewhat inevitably missed his return. His 69 was a fine final round, especially for someone who was supposed to choke under the pressure, but Seve’s 65 (for an 11-under-par tournament total) was simply too good on the day. Price’s time would come but Ballesteros was just too good. “That was the best round of my life,” he said later. It would be hard to disagree. He was the most entertaining golfer I’ve had the privilege to watch. Thank you Seve.