20.09 Here's those Fabian Delph quotes in full:
"My armband got nicked, someone got my left boot, but I could appreciate the relief the fans are feeling after a result like that.
"It was dangerous. Someone tried to take my boot off. People tried to kiss me and were biting me. It was scary."
20.03 It looks like the police intervened, as evidenced by this picture:
20.00 Speaking of Pulis, Yacob's sending off probably stopped him from getting West Brom back into the tie. Sinclair's goal shortly after demonstrated that. He'll be disappointed too - at eight points clear of the relegation zone, West Brom should be safe, giving his side very little to play for between now and the end of the season.
19.56 Tony Pulis joining in with the pitch invasion:
19.50 Players are not happy:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Nick Mashiter - Fabian Delph has described the pitch invasion at the end as "very, very scary". &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23avfc" target="_blank"&gt;#avfc&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
19.45 News hot off the press:
Aston Villa are facing the prospect of a Football Association investigation after a pitch invasion marred the end of their FA Cup quarter-final win over West Brom.
Referee Anthony Taylor was forced to call a halt to the game in stoppage time after hundreds of fans ran onto the field, prematurely celebrating Villa's victory.
The game eventually restarted after a couple of minutes' delay, but fans ran onto the field again at the final whistle, this time in their thousands.
West Brom substitute Calum McManaman was particularly angered by the treatment his teammates were receiving as they left the field.
19.42 My favourite Vine from the end of that game is of this assistant referee, who runs off the pitch faster than any man has ever run before.
FULL TIME: ASTON VILLA 2 (Delph, Sinclair) Jonathan Pearce saying they've ruined the day seems a step too far though. Look at the joy.
90 (+4) mins: This is a bit of a shame. There are some Villa fans on the pitch, with the stewards struggling to keep them back. The atmosphere has just turned slightly ugly as a result of the red card.
90 (+2) mins: RED CARD FOR JACK GREALISH! That seems very very harsh. He knocks it past Lescott and goes down but is accussed of diving. Second yellow, and he's off.
90 (+1) mins: Not like that they won't - Berahino is in the area in a little bit of space, but drags his shot well wide.
90 mins: Five minutes of stoppage time but surely West Brom can't...
88 mins: Slight delay as Agbonlahor comes off for Carles Gil.
85 mins: Ten man West Brom are done and Villa are on their way to Wembley. Tony Pulis will not be happy at all.
84 mins: GOAL FOR ASTON VILLA! SCOTT SINCLAIR! There's a horde of fans on the pitch celebrating with the players. Villa break exceptionally and Grealish plays a nice ball to Sinclair. He carries it from the halfway line before checking inside and curling it past the outstretched Myhill. ASTON VILLA 2 (SCOTT SINCLAIR) WEST BROMWICH ALBION 0.
83 mins: Grealish nearly darts away down the left, but a sliding tackle stops him. Villa are now just trying to keep the ball.
81 mins: The BBC commentary team have been complimentary towards Anthony Taylor today, but I don't really get where they've been coming from. Not one of the better top flight referees in my opinion.
79 mins: RED CARD FOR YACOB! A whipped corner is kept in but that just lets Villa break. West Brom mop up but the ball breaks to Bacuna, who slides and, in the process, is...well, nothing. Nothing happened. Definitely not a second yellow for Yacob there. Bad bad decision.
78 mins: Clark defends well with Berahino chasing. West Brom have a corner, one of their first chances for a while.
76 mins: A better pass there and Villa would have had two. Grealish was waiting on the edge of the area for a pull back that never came. From there, Sinclair tried a cross, which was almost deflected in.
75 mins: Villa are killing West Brom on the break. Agbonlahor is taken out by Yacob, who is shown a yellow card as a result.
73 mins: Charles N'Zogbia comes off for Jack Grealish. Now, I don't want to be that guy but I had him on loan on this year's Football Manager and he's amazing. I'm sure he'll be as good as Kim Kallstrom.
71 mins: Another chance for Villa. They break forward again, and after a nice passing sequence, Westwood receives the ball on the edge of the area. His curled attempt is blocked wide though.
69 mins: Sinclair with another chance! Fed through again, his left footed strike just curls past the left post. He may have had more time than he thought there.
68 mins: Almost a second for Villa! Agbonlahor feeds in Sinclair, who gets onto the ball, but Myhill comes rushing out to intervene. Good goalkeeping.
66 mins: Agbonlahor bursts down the left and almost delivers a good cross for N'Zogbia, but West Brom cut it out.
65 mins: Here's a photo of Delph opening the scoring. Are Villa on their way to Wembley?
64 mins: Villa make a substitution, bringing Carlos Sanchez on for Tom Cleverley. He gives the ball away with his first touch.
61 mins: Delph nearly sets Sinclair free. The Leeds academy product plays in the ex-Swansea man, but Sinclair strikes his shot against West Brom shins.
59 mins: Given saves Villa there, darting off his line to stop the onrushing Saido Berahino after good work from Ideye. Good work from the veteran 'keeper.
58 mins: Fair to say that Tony Pulis is not happy. He knows his team should be level. I hear he's considering taking back his official club branded Lescott mug.
56 mins: LESCOTT MISSES WHEN HE SHOULD HAVE SCORED. Excellent corner in is accidentally flicked on by Tom Cleverley. Lescott is at the back post, but heads it well wide. Should be 1-1.
55 mins: Joleon Lescott almost got lucky there. A scramble at the back for Villa sees the ball fall to him, but he can only hit it straight at Given.
52 mins: Craig Dawson picks up a yellow for West Brom, who have been the weaker team since half time. Whatever Sherwood said in the dressing room has clearly worked. Villa Park is loud.
50 mins: GOAL! ASTON VILLA TAKE THE LEAD! A lovely ball across the box from N'Zogbia finds Fabian Delph on the edge of the area, and he rifles it past Myhill. Finally! ASTON VILLA 1 (FABIAN DELPH) WEST BROMWICH ALBION 0
49 mins: Villa push forward again, but Bacuna's cross/shot/soft pass just trickles into Myhill's expectant hands.
48 mins: Cleverley loses the ball after a slack pass and then takes out Chris Brunt in the middle. Not very Cleverley done.
47 mins: They do seem to be slightly more willing to push forward since the restart. Mark Lawrenson has started talking about wrestling.
46 mins: Villa get us underway again, try and do something and then lose it almost immediately. Sigh.
HALF TIME: ASTON VILLA 0 WEST BROMWICH ALBION 0
Not a classic by any stretch of the imagination. West Brom have had the better of it, but it's definitely finely poised. Either of these two could still find themselves at Wembley in a few weeks. I hope it's confirmed by the end of today. Please, no replays.
Tim is now looking less happy:
45 mins: That's the Scott Sinclair of old. He dribbles past former Manchester City teammate Lescott with ease, but his low cross is caught by Myhill. One minute added time.
44 mins: Lawrenson is not happy about the lack of players getting forward for Villa. Another cross and another lack of players to meet it.
41 mins: A bit of violence in the middle of the park. Olsson takes out Agbonlahor before Gardner scythes down another Villa player. Taylor gives the free kick at the second time of asking.
40 mins: Sent straight into Boaz Myhill's hands. Sherwood is now angry too.
38 mins: Delph manages to get a cross in from the right but it's blocked. He's then kicked up in the air, giving Villa a chance to get the ball into the box from a set piece.
36 mins: Gardner had an opportunity to cross it in, but Matt Lowton tackled well. The break leaves Pulis livid again, with the West Brom manager convinced his side should have had a throw.
35 mins: West Brom tried to pin Villa in, but a loose ball gives Given an opportunity to get his side out of their half through a goal kick.
34 mins: Long range strike by Brunt is deflected, and Given is forced to tip it over the bar. Close.
33 mins: Good tackle made on Gardner, but Anthony Taylor gives a free kick to West Brom.
31 mins: Dawson manages to get a cross in from that side. Lovely ball too, but Ideye's header is slightly weak and Given manages to save.
30 mins: Sinclair tries to do something down the left but plays a pass directly against the West Brom right back. Dawson then smacks the ball out of play. He's been weirdly good on the right.
28 mins: No real chances in the last few minutes, but Pulis is livid about something on the touchline. Maybe Tim should tell him another joke?
26 mins: Tim Sherwood and Tony Pulis share a moment, possibly over their shared love of official club branded clothing.
24 mins: End to end stuff now. Delph put in a slightly too long cross, allowing West Brom to break. They do, and Brown gets a shot away from range, but Given is able to fall down slowly and pick it up.
22 mins: Genuinely terrible defending there from Villa, as Okore and Clark make a weird decision over how to deal with a long ball, mainly by having Okore smack it back to the goalkeeper. Could have been dangerous.
20 mins: There's three or four tackles in the centre circle, and Anthony Taylor gives Villa a free kick for the most innocuous of the lot. Yacob is not happy.
19 mins: N'Zogbia fires it into the area from the left, and Olsson is forced to slide and knock it away. Dangerous there, with Agbonlahor lurking.
17 mins: Mark Lawrenson is not happy with Villa's defence. He believes every single one of them has made a mistake in the first 17 minutes. That's impressive.
15 mins: A ball in from the left from Delph, who jinked past a few players, reaches Agbonlahor, but his touch is heavy and he's forced to turn and shoot with his weaker left boot. The shot is blocked easily.
14 mins: Brown Ideye is caught offside in the Villa box after a nice run. If the ball had been a bit earlier, he might have been in.
13 mins: This is getting feisty. Tom Cleverley is dispossessed on the right side by Morrison, and N'Zogbia clatters the West Brom player in response. Yellow card.
12 mins: I promise you, Scott Sinclair spent last season on loan at West Brom. Really. No, genuinely. No lie.
11 mins: Dawson wins a free kick in the middle of the park after a foul by Scott Sinclair. Yes, he still exists. Will he haunt his former club today?
9 mins: Classy from both sets of fans - West Brom applaud for Jeff Astle on the 9th minute, and Villa's supporters join in too.
9 mins: At the other end, Charles N'Zogbia nearly crafts a chance for Gabi Agbonlahor, but West Brom knock it clear. Should be a corner, but it isn't.
7 mins: West Brom should be a goal ahead. Gardner crosses from the right and Brown Ideye is free in the area, but running onto the ball, he smashes it over the bar.
6 mins: Excellent ball in from the right by Craig Dawson, but Villa scramble it clear. Berahino was lurking.
5 mins: He's already been called into a save, Gardner winning the ball and then feeding Saido Berahino, who hits his right footed strike straight at Given.
3 mins: Shay Given gets a touch of the ball after a long punt from the back from West Brom. He was spectacular in the last round. I've not seen the stats but I believe he made 50 Saves of Shay.
2 mins: Villa Park is rocking, which is a bit of a change from recent times. This a big one.
1 mins: Or maybe not. Lescott now seems to be playing at left back in a back four.
17.29 The BBC believe that this is how West Brom will line-up, something of a departure from the norm:
17.26 The players are about to emerge from the tunnel. Delph captains Villa today. I think he might be one of the most underrated players in the Premier League.
17.19 The mysteriously named @eamov1 has a story of his own about former Leeds and Fulham star David Healy:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Eamo - &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/awinehouse1" target="_blank"&gt;@awinehouse1&lt;/a&gt; I once saw David Healy in a Motorway Services Bookies. He looked annoyed. I didn't talk to him.&lt;/noframe&gt;
I'm sure he was just browsing.
17.14 I've just eaten an iced bun. Over on the QPR/Spurs live blog, I was asking for times you've seen footballers at a fast food restaurant. Tony Rusiecki replied just after the final whistle, with a tale about Ryan Giggs and Lee Sharpe. I'll let him continue:
Back in 1993 I was visiting Manchester and very late on the Saturday Ryan Giggs and Lee Sharpe started a giant food fight at McDonalds in the city centre. The place was a mess. Oh the follies of youth.
Send me any other stories.
17.08 Ah, the FA Cup 6th round, which back in my day (I'm 22) was known as the quarter-final. We've got a genuine derby on our hands in the now traditional tea time kick-off, as Villa face West Brom only days after their last minute win against today's opponents in the Premier League. Can tactics Tim get his new team to Wembley? Here are the teams:
Aston Villa: Given, Lowton, Okore, Clark, Bacuna, Westwood, Delph, Cleverley, Sinclair, Agbonlahor, N’Zogbia.
West Bromwich Albion: Myhill, Dawson, McAuley, Lescott, Olsson, Brunt, Morrison, Yacob, Gardner, Berahino, Ideye.
Preview: Amitai will be here at about 5pm to bring you team news, build-up and then the match itself. In the meantime, enjoy the articles above and here's John Percy's match notes
First blood to Aston Villa, after their dramatic victory on Tuesday night which could represent a turning point for Tim Sherwood. But Tony Pulis has been counting down the days until the rematch as he bids to erase the memories of Albion's worst performance since his appointment. This will be another encounter not for the faint-hearted with the stakes raised even higher by the prospect of a trip to Wembley (for the semi-final, at least).