The Merseyside derby is the name given to football matches between Everton and Liverpool, two major clubs from Liverpool, in the metropolitan county of Merseyside in England. It is the longest running top-flight derby in England, having been played at that level since the 1962–63 season. Everton play their home games at Goodison Park, while Liverpool play theirs at Anfield. The match has been called the Merseyside derby since at least 1955.[1]
Traditionally, the Merseyside derby was referred to as The friendly derby because of the large number of families with both Liverpool and Everton supporters[2] and it is one of the few local derbies that does not enforce total fan segregation.[3] The 1984 Football League Cup Final at Wembley saw almost all sections of the ground mixed and combined chants of "Merseyside, Merseyside" and "Are you watching Manchester?"[citation needed] Since the mid-1980s, however, the rivalry has intensified on and off the field, and since the inception of the Premier League, the Merseyside derby has had more red cards than any other game and has been referred to as "The most ill-disciplined and explosive fixture in the Premier League."[4][5]
Everton F.C. were founded in 1878 and from 1884 played their home matches at Anfield, which was owned by club chairman John Houlding. Several board members of Everton were members of the Liberal Party who were associated with the National Temperance Federation whilst Houlding was a Conservative Party member and a brewer whose business interests were diametrically opposed to the temperance movement. Politics and disputes over money meant that Houlding was increasingly at odds with other members of the Everton board. The result was that in 1892 the Everton directors vacated Anfield and purchased a new ground at Goodison Park on the other side of Stanley Park. Houlding responded by founding a new club to use Anfield: Liverpool.
The professional clubs of the 1890s attracted much interest among the public, on and off the field. The 1867 Reform Act had given what would become football attending masses the opportunity to vote in the local and national elections. Everton and Liverpool attendances would reach around 10–15,000 in a local authority ward with a population of 23,000. Local politicians saw involvement in the two football clubs as an opportunity to gain media exposure to the local electorate.
At Everton board level, the main friction that emerged was that between the retention of an autocratic ownership structure and the creation of a more democratic one which closely mapped the sociopolitical divide.
Religion is sometimes put forward as a reason for the split with Liverpool founder Houlding a prominent Orangeman and Everton's new chairman George Mahon a rival Liberal Home Rule advocating MP[further explanation needed], but at the time of the split, among the Everton committee members, James Clement Baxter was the only Catholic, the rest were Protestants.
There are a number of reasons for the "friendly derby" tag. Firstly the clubs are situated in the north of the city and very close to each other (less than a mile), with only Stanley Park separating the two. Everton actually played at Anfield, now Liverpool's ground, before a rent dispute with the ground owners saw Everton relocate to Goodison Park and the formation of Liverpool F.C. From 1902 to 1932 the two clubs even shared the same matchday programme. Today there are no evident geographical, political, social or religious divides as in other derbies, although for many years a sectarian divide did exist within the city. It is unclear how (if at all) this influenced the support bases of the two clubs and more recent research has indicated that it was more likely to have been a political allegiance that influenced support.[6] During the 1950s and 1960s Everton became known as the Catholic club mainly as a result of successful Irish players Tommy Eglington, Peter Farrell and Jimmy O'Neill as well as manager Johnny Carey. This in turn caused Liverpool to be thought of as Protestant club, not signing an Irish Catholic until Ronnie Whelan in 1979.[7] However, it should be noted that this notional divide was never seen as a basis for supporting a certain side as is the case with Celtic and Rangers. In truth both teams have strong support from all denominations as well as many fans from Presbyterian North Wales, Northern Ireland and Republic of Ireland. Most importantly, the actual clubs themselves did not act to strengthen sectarian divides and in fact both clubs stem from a Methodist origin.
Unlike other local derbies (such as the Bristol, Birmingham and Stoke derbies, where the clubs are separated by long distances across their towns), in Liverpool violence between Evertonians and Liverpudlians is a rarity; however, in the fallout from the Heysel Stadium disaster, fan relationships became strained, with Everton fans blaming Liverpool hooligans for their subsequent ban from European club competitions. However, relations improved after the Hillsborough disaster when both sets of fans rallied together, with Evertonians even joining in on the boycott of The Sun while Everton and Liverpool scarves were intertwined stretching across Stanley Park between Anfield and Goodison Park. Recently, after the murder of 11-year-old Evertonian Rhys Jones in a gun crime incident in 2007, Liverpool Football Club invited the victim's parents and older brother to Anfield for a Champions League match. The Z-Cars theme tune "Johnny Todd", the song to which Everton traditionally run out, was played for the first time ever at Anfield while the victim's family stood on the pitch wearing Everton shirts and scarves. A standing ovation was given before "You'll Never Walk Alone" was played. Upon the complete vindication of Liverpool fans at the Hillsborough disaster in August 2012 Everton entertained Newcastle United at Goodison Park. The sides were lead out by two children wearing Everton and Liverpool shirts with the number 9 and 6 on the back. An announcer read out the names of all the 96 victims while "He Ain't Heavy, He's My Brother" by The Hollies was played to a standing ovation.
The city of Liverpool is statistically the most successful football city in England with Everton and Liverpool winning a combined 27 league titles, and there has never been a season without one of either Everton or Liverpool competing in the top flight. Both clubs have rich histories, with Everton being one of the 12 founder members of the Football League. Everton have only been relegated twice and have competed in over 100 seasons of top-flight football, more than any other English club. To date, Everton have won nine League Championships, five FA Cups and one European Cup Winners Cup. Thus, they have the only UEFA trophy that Liverpool never won. Liverpool have won the European Cup 5 times, more than any other English club, have eighteen top-flight titles, have the FA Cup on 7 occasions, the Football League Cup a record 8 times, and three UEFA Cups.
Since 1892, the clubs have appeared almost every year in the Liverpool Senior Cup, although Liverpool, Everton and Tranmere Rovers only field reserve sides against the likes of Prescot Cables, Southport and Marine. Everton hold 45 titles while Liverpool have won 39.
Everton and Liverpool also have affiliated women's teams playing in the FA WSL. Most recently in 2013, Liverpool Ladies won the FA WSL league and subsequently qualified for European competition for the next season.[8]
During the 1960s, Liverpool and Everton were regular winners of domestic trophies, but while Liverpool went from strength to strength in the 1970s and 1980s, Everton went through a relatively barren spell after their 1970 title triumph and did not win a major trophy for the next 14 years.
Everton, however, started to emerge as a serious threat to Liverpool's dominance of the domestic scene following the appointment of Howard Kendall as manager at the start of the 1981–82 season. The first Merseyside derby that Kendall oversaw was at Anfield on 7 November, when his side lost 3–1 to Bob Paisley's.[9] This saw Liverpool standing seventh in the league and Everton 13th.[10] An identical scoreline followed in the return game at Goodison Park in late March, by which time Liverpool had overcome a dismal start to the season to muscle in on a title race which they eventually won, while Everton were still mid-table.[11]
In 1982–83, the final season of Bob Paisley's management before he retired to make way for Joe Fagan, Liverpool were champions once again with Everton finishing mid-table, and the most notable of the two derbies occurred in early November when Liverpool triumphed 0–5 at Goodison Park. The return match at Anfield in mid-March brought a goalless draw.[12]
1983–84 was the season when Everton (who won the FA Cup at the end of the campaign) really started to emerge as a serious threat to Liverpool. Though Liverpool won the league title and Everton still couldn't even make the top five, Liverpool needed a replay to see off Everton 1–0 in the League Cup final at Wembley. The Anfield derby in early November saw Liverpool triumph 3–0, while the clash at Goodison Park four months later ended in a 1–1 draw.[13]
The 1984–85 season began with a Liverpool derby in the FA Charity Shield at Wembley, when league champions Liverpool faced FA Cup winners Everton in a game which Everton won 1–0 due to an own goal by Bruce Grobbelaar. The first league clash came on 20 October 1984, when a 0–1 win for Everton at Anfield saw Howard Kendall's team occupy fourth place in the league and show signs of challenging for the title for the first time in his four seasons in charge, while Liverpool were a lowly 17th and just 2 points outside the relegation zone.[14] Liverpool's final game of the season came on 23 May when they lost 1–0 to Everton (who still had two games left to play) at Goodison Park. Everton had been crowned champions by this stage, while Liverpool had rallied since their terrible start to the season to occupy second place.[15][16]
1985–86 was perhaps the most exciting season for the fans of both clubs, as Liverpool and Everton battled it out for both the league title and the FA Cup. The first Merseyside derby of the season came at Goodison Park on 21 September 1985 and was won 2–3 by Liverpool, who stood second behind Manchester United while Everton occupied sixth place.[17] Everton triumphed 0–2 in the return match at Anfield five months later, by which time Everton had just taken over from Manchester United as league leaders and Liverpool were eight points behind them in second place.[18] The climax to this exciting campaign came at Wembley Stadium when Liverpool and Everton contested the first all Liverpool FA Cup final on 10 May 1986. An early goal by Gary Lineker suggested that Everton could gain revenge on Liverpool for beating them to the league title by defeating them in the FA Cup final, but in the second half the tables were turned as a double from Ian Rush and another goal from Craig Johnston made Liverpool only the fifth English club to complete the double.[19]
The FA Charity Shield for 1986 was shared between Liverpool and Everton, who drew 1–1 at Wembley, but the first league derby of the season between the two clubs did not happen until late November in a goalless draw at Goodison Park. Both clubs were challenging for the title at this stage alongside Arsenal (leaders), Nottingham Forest and unlikely contenders Luton Town and Coventry City.[20] The League Cup quarter final on 21 January 1987 saw Liverpool win 0–1 at Goodison Park. The Anfield derby in late April saw Liverpool triumph 3–1, but it was not enough to prevent Everton from winning the title within the next couple of weeks.[21] The 1986–87 season was the last time that Everton overshadowed Liverpool until Everton's dominance over their local rivals between 2012 and 2014.
In the 1988–89 season, Everton were Liverpool's first opponents in a competitive game after the Hillsborough disaster on 15 April 1989, which resulted in the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans at the FA Cup semi-final. The game between the two sides was a league fixture on 3 May which ended in a goalless draw.[22] On 20 May, the two sides met at Wembley for the second all Liverpool FA Cup final in four seasons. The match went into extra time before Liverpool triumphed 3–2, with Ian Rush (twice) and John Aldridge scoring for Liverpool and both of Everton's goals coming from Stuart McCall.[23]
By 1990–91, Everton were no longer generally considered as a leading English playing side (finishing ninth that season having started the season near the foot of the table), while Liverpool finished second in the league, but the campaign still brought one of the most pulsating clashes between the two clubs. Liverpool and Everton were drawn for the FA Cup fifth round at Anfield on 17 February 1991. The match ended in a goalless draw, and the replay three days later ended in a thrilling 4–4 draw at Goodison Park, in which Peter Beardsley scored twice. 1990–91 was Kenny Dalglish's last season as Liverpool manager, as he resigned two days after the 4–4 draw with Everton. It was also the last season of "replays of replays" as penalties after extra time took over as the competition's ultimate tie winner decider for the 1991–92 season. The second replay ended with a 1–0 win for Everton on 27 February, and ended the Reds double hopes.[24]
The close season of 1991 saw Peter Beardsley move from Liverpool to Everton, followed within a year by defender Gary Ablett, causing more tension in the Merseyside derby, though the first couple of years after their transfers saw Liverpool and Everton firmly overtaken by Manchester United and the likes of Blackburn Rovers and Arsenal as the biggest challengers in English football. On 7 December 1992, Everton defeated Liverpool 2–1 at Goodison Park in a game where Peter Beardsley became only the second man in history to score for both clubs in the derby.[25]
The 1993–94 derby at Anfield saw Liverpool defeat Everton 2–1, not having much effect for a mid-table Liverpool side but increasing the risk of relegation (a battle which was ultimately won) for Everton. Perhaps the most notable event of this game was the winning goal by Robbie Fowler, who turned 19 the following month and was one of the most promising young players in England at the time.[26]
The next notable city derby came on 18 October 1997, when Everton triumphed 2–0 at Goodison in a victory that ultimately saved them from relegation (they only stayed up by having a greater goal difference than Bolton Wanderers) and helped end Liverpool's title bid.[27]
The 2000–01 season saw one of the most exciting derbies of the Premier League era. Liverpool, having won the first derby at Anfield, completed the double with a thrilling 2–3 victory over Everton at Goodison in April, with the injury-time winner by Gary McAllister proving to be crucial at the end of the season in helping Liverpool qualify for the UEFA Champions League—which replaced the European Cup in 1992—for the first time.
By the end of the 2001–02, Liverpool had finished above Everton in the league for 15 seasons in succession, but 2002–03 saw Everton showing signs of eclipsing them for the first time in years. After a brilliant run of form saw Liverpool top the Premier League in October, an 11-match winless league run followed their 2–0 home win over West Ham United in early November and during that barren spell they drew 0–0 at home to an Everton side who were actually above them and looking like qualifying for Europe after several seasons of persistent relegation battles. However, they were on course for their fifth-place finish when they next met Everton on 19 April and won 1–2 at Goodison Park, a result which pushed their city neighbours towards seventh place and narrowly deprived them of European football.[28]
In 2004–05, Everton finished fourth in the league and Liverpool came fifth, the first time since Everton's 1987 title win that Liverpool had finished below them. In a season which saw Liverpool win the Champions League title, Everton gave their neighbours a reminder of how far they had progressed under the management of David Moyes with a 1–0 win at Goodison Park on 11 December 2004, though Liverpool won the return match at Anfield 2–1 three months later.[29]
Everton had a setback and finished mid-table in 2005–06, while Liverpool's compensation for their prolonged title wait came in the form of a narrow FA Cup final triumph. And Liverpool triumphed 3–1 in both of the Merseyside derbies that season, giving their neighbours a reminder that they still had some way to go before they could have any real claim to being the stronger of the two Liverpool teams.[31]
In 2006–07, Everton recovered to finish in the top six, while Liverpool finished in the top four, and there was an early season triumph for the blue half of Liverpool as Everton crushed Liverpool 3–0 at Goodison Park in early September. They also held them to a goalless draw at Anfield in early February and helped hold them behind pace setters Manchester United and Chelsea.[32]
Liverpool did the double over Everton in 2007–08. However, the meeting at Goodison Park was shrouded in controversy when after a coming together between Liverpool's Steven Gerrard and Everton's Tony Hibbert, referee Mark Clattenburg awarded Liverpool a penalty and seemed to change his mind in favour of a red card for Hibbert after Gerrard appeared to have said something to him, when most pundits felt a caution would have been sufficient. Everton dominated the game after going behind, but were denied what seemed to be two clear penalties in the closing stages of the game when Joleon Lescott was twice wrestled to the ground by Jamie Caragher at Everton corners. The victory helped secure a top-four finish and Champions League qualification for Liverpool, leaving Everton to settle for a UEFA Cup place.[citation needed] Referee Clattenburg was not chosen to officiate again at Goodison Park after that match until December 2013, six years later, and in that period only officiated one Everton game, away at Aston Villa.
In the 2008–09 season, Liverpool and Everton met four times, Liverpool winning the League encounter at Goodison Park 0–2 while drawing the other League fixture that dealt a severe blow to their title ambitions. The FA Cup saw Everton defeat ten-man Liverpool in extra time in the replay thanks to an injury-time winner by Dan Gosling after a 1–1 draw at Anfield. That season, both teams were a major force as Liverpool challenged for the title while Everton came close to qualifying for the Champions League and progressing to the 2009 FA Cup Final, only to fall to Chelsea.[citation needed]
When the sides met in the 2009–10 season, both clubs were suffering from a disastrous start to the season. Both games followed similar patterns, with Everton enjoying the greater possession and creating more chances in the games, but it was Liverpool who scored the goals in a 0–2 victory at Goodison Park and 1–0 at Anfield, the latter thanks to a goal from Dirk Kuyt.[citation needed]
In the Goodison Park encounter on 17 October 2010 in the 2010–11 season, Everton won 2–0 with goals from Tim Cahill and Mikel Arteta, while the return league game at Anfield in January 2011 ended in a 2–2 draw.
In the 2011–12 season, Liverpool and Everton met three times, twice in the league and once in the FA Cup, with Liverpool winning all three. The first meeting took place on 1 October 2011, with Liverpool winning 0–2 in the league at Goodison Park (goals from Andy Carroll and Luis Suárez) against an Everton side depleted by Jack Rodwell's early, controversial red card, which was later rescinded by The Football Association. On 13 March 2012, Liverpool won the Anfield fixture 3–0 after a hat-trick by Steven Gerrard, who became the first player to score a hat-trick in the derby since Ian Rush in 1982.[33] The third meeting of the season was the FA Cup semi-final at Wembley on 14 April. Everton took the lead through Nikica Jelavić's goal in the first half. Liverpool equalised through a Luis Suárez goal midway through the second half, and Andy Carroll scored the winning goal for Liverpool in the 87th minute.[34] However, despite Liverpool having success throughout the season against their traditional rivals, Everton finished one place higher than Liverpool at the end of the Premier League season.
Matches between Everton/Liverpool and Tranmere Rovers, based in Birkenhead on the other side of the River Mersey, are also classed as Merseyside derbies, but as Tranmere have spent all of their history outside the top-flight; competitive matches are a rarity. They have occasionally faced Everton and Liverpool in cup competitions. Their last meeting with both clubs came in the FA Cup in 2001. Tranmere caused an upset by beating Everton 3–0 in the fourth round,[35] before losing 4–2 to Liverpool in the quarter-finals.[36]
Statistics are correct as of 20 April 2016.
This derby is responsible for many records across all derby matches, largely due to it being contested so many times:
The following are records just for the City of Liverpool derby itself:
The following have scored 4 or more league goals in the Derby. This includes Premier League matches, its predecessor the Football League First Division, FA Cup, League Cup and Charity Shield. The Screen Sport Super Cup goals are also included for Rush and Sharp, although this was a competition which was not high on Liverpool or Everton's agenda. This list is up to and including 20 April 2016.
Current scorers: Liverpool's Daniel Sturridge is the leading scorer among current players with four goals; Everton's Romelu Lukaku is one behind on three goals. Other current players with derby goals are Liverpool's Philippe Coutinho (2), Danny Ings, Divock Origi and Mamadou Sakho and from Everton Leon Osman, Kevin Mirallas and Phil Jagielka, all with one goal each.
Goals from "overseas" players: Philippe Coutinho, Romelu Lukaku, Kevin Mirallas, Divock Origi and Mamadou Sakho are among a total of 26 non-British (Isles) players from 16 different countries to have scored in the derby (not including own goals, which add three countries to the list) since Liverpool's Craig Johnston became the first such player to do so, in the 1986 Cup final (though Bruce Grobbelaar was the first non-British Isles player to get on the derby scoresheet with his own-goal in the 1984 Charity Shield). Everton's Tim Cahill and Liverpool's Dirk Kuyt, who both left their respective clubs after the 2012 season, along with Luis Suárez, who left Liverpool in 2014, are the leading "overseas" players with five goals each. France is the leading country, with five different scorers.
More goals than years: Liverpool's Fred Howe and Everton's Tommy Lawton bear the curious distinctions of scoring more goals than they actually spent in years in the city of Liverpool. Howe scoring five goals in three years and Lawton four goals in three years.
Hat-tricks: The first derby hat-trick was scored by Everton's Alex "Sandy" Young who scored four in the 1904 5–1 win at Goodison. Other Evertonians to manage hat-ticks include Parker in 1914 and Dixie Dean twice, in 1928 and 1931, the last Everton player to net a treble. Liverpool hat-tricks have come from Chambers (1922), Forshaw (1925), Barton (1933), and Howe (four goals in 1935). Almost 50 years passed before the next derby hat-trick, scored by Ian Rush, who scored four in a 5–0 win at Goodison in 1982, and then another 30 years passed until Steven Gerrard scored a hat-trick against Everton at Anfield in a 3–0 win. Curiously, of all the league hat-tricks, only two (Young's in 1904 and Rush's in 1982) were managed at Goodison; all the others were at Anfield.
Own goals: Sandy Brown's famous own goal in Everton's championship winning 1969–70 season was, surprisingly, only the second own goal in the history of the fixture, the first having been scored by Balmer (Everton) in 1902. Since then, eight Evertonians have been "credited" with an own-goal, including two in the same match at Anfield in 1972. There have only been three Liverpool own goals. Leighton Baines's unlucky deflection at Goodison in 2012–13 is the most recent of all derby-day own-goals.
Scoring in consecutive matches: Between May and September 1986, Ian Rush scored for Liverpool in four consecutive derbies, none of them League games (Cup final, Charity shield and two Super Cup finals). Several players have scored in three consecutive games: Hardman (E, 1905–06), Freeman (E, 1909–10), Parkinson (L, 1910–11), King (E, 1978–79), Lineker (E, 1985–86), Barnes (L, 1989–90) and Fowler (L, 1995–96).
Youngest derby goal scorer: Although difficult to verify, since birthdates of early players are not known, the youngest derby goal scorer is probably Everton's Danny Cadamarteri who scored the winner at Goodison six days after his 18th birthday, in October 1997.
League games only. Highest ever attendance 100,000 estimate at 1984 Milk Cup final and 1984 Charity Shield.
Despite the huge rivalry, Liverpool have completed more direct transfers with Everton than any other club.[citation needed] However, Liverpool did not buy directly from Everton between 1959 and 2000, while there was a similar "freeze" in the other direction between 1961 and 1982.
Dave Hickson, John Heydon and Frank Mitchell are the only three players to have played for Liverpool, Everton and Tranmere Rovers, the three main Merseyside clubs still in existence (Tranmere dropped out of the league in 2015). New Brighton were football league members from 1923–51; Bill Lacey and Neil McBain played for all three of Everton, Liverpool and New Brighton. John Whitehead played for Liverpool, Everton and also for Bootle in their one year as a league team (1892–93), before they were replaced in Division 2 by local rivals Liverpool FC.
The list below shows transfer dates and fees, where known.
The following played for another/other club before moving to Liverpool
The following played for another/other club before moving to Everton
As well as players "crossing the park," Everton's first ever manager, William Edward Barclay, stayed on at Anfield after Everton moved to Goodison Park to become Liverpool's first manager.
Only two players have scored for both sides in a Merseyside derby:
The clubs first met in the Liverpool Senior Cup final which Liverpool won 1–0 in 1893. However, this was an amateur match and is not counted in either club's records as an official Merseyside derby.
The first ever League meeting was in the 1894–95 season when Everton won 3–0 at Goodison Park; it was only at Liverpool's sixth attempt that they beat Everton with a 3–1 win in 1897–98 at Anfield.
The FA Cup 5th Round tie, on 11 March 1967 at Goodison Park, was watched by 64,318 fans, and a further 40,169 at Anfield on giant screen, making a total of 104,487. Everton won 1–0, with Alan Ball scoring the winner.
The 1966 Charity Shield saw Everton play Liverpool at Goodison Park, with the latter winning 0–1. Before kick-off, the League Championship, which had been won by Liverpool, was paraded around the pitch along with the FA Cup that Everton had won. Liverpool's Roger Hunt and Everton's Ray Wilson both World Cup winners carried the Jules Rimet Trophy around the field for a lap of honour.
The first meeting between the two sides at Wembley Stadium came in the final of the 1984 League Cup, with Liverpool eventually winning a replay (at Maine Road, Manchester) after the first tie at Wembley was drawn.
Later that year, the clubs met again at Wembley Stadium in the FA Charity Shield. Everton emerged as the victors thanks to a Bruce Grobbelaar own goal.
The 1986 and 1989 FA Cup finals are still the only Merseyside derby finals in the competition to date with Liverpool victorious on both occasions, 3–1 and 3–2 (after extra time) respectively.
On 23 April 1977, the two sides met in the semi-final of the FA Cup at Maine Road, Manchester. Although Liverpool took the lead twice, Everton fought back twice and appeared to have scored a winner when, with three minutes to play, Bryan Hamilton turned in a cross from Ronnie Goodlass, only to see the goal chalked off by referee Clive Thomas.
6 November 1982 saw Liverpool defeat Everton 0–5 at Goodison Park, with Ian Rush scoring four of his side's goals.
March 1988 Liverpool were unbeaten in 29 league games from the start of the season (then a joint record) when a Wayne Clarke goal helped Everton win 1–0 at Goodison.
On 20 February 1991, an epic 4–4 FA Cup replay saw Everton come from behind four times. It is generally regarded as one of the greatest Merseyside derbies ever. Liverpool's manager Kenny Dalglish subsequently resigned, with Everton winning the second replay the following week.[52]
The first derby of the new millennium at Goodison Park, on 21 April 2000, ended controversially. With the score 0–0, in the dying seconds Liverpool goalkeeper Sander Westerveld went to clear the ball upfield, but it hit Everton's Don Hutchison in the back and rebounded over the goal-line. Referee Graham Poll disallowed the goal, claiming that he had already blown for time, although TV replays showed this was not the case. Ten years later, in his autobiography, the referee admitted that he should have given the goal and apologised to Everton fans.[53]
On 18 April 2001, Liverpool won an epic 2–3 league derby at Goodison Park. Liverpool went 0–1 up after five minutes through Emile Heskey, but Duncan Ferguson made it level just before half time. In the 57th minute, Markus Babbel put Liverpool back in the lead. Robbie Fowler then missed a penalty before a David Unsworth penalty squared it up again. Liverpool then had Igor Biscan sent off. As the match appeared to be heading for a draw, in the 93rd minute, Gary McAllister measured a 44-yard free kick (stealing ten-yards before striking the ball) into the net to win the game. Following this crucial goal, Liverpool remained unbeaten for their remaining nine games and qualified for UEFA Champions League by one point, winning the FA Cup and UEFA Cup en route.[54]
The 2006 Goodison Park derby saw Everton beating Liverpool 3–0, scoring three goals for the first time in a league derby since 1966, and the first time at Goodison since 1904 with goals from Tim Cahill and a double from then-club record signing Andy Johnson. This was only Everton's second win over Liverpool in seven years and took them to the top of the Premier League.
In October 2007, Liverpool won a game 1–2 at Goodison, Everton having two players sent off resulting in penalties which Liverpool scored each time. After Everton had a shout for a penalty turned down when Jamie Carragher fouled Joleon Lescott late on in the game the Everton fans gave referee Mark Clattenburg so much abuse at the stadium, after the game and online that he has not officiated at Goodison since - and has taken charge of only one Everton game, at Aston Villa in January 2012.
In the February 2009 FA Cup 4th round replay, Liverpool and Everton were drawing 0–0 again and the game went into extra time. Everton's teenage substitute Dan Gosling managed to break the deadlock with a dramatic winner in the 118th minute.[55] The Toffees managed to reach their first final in 15 years.
In the April 2012 FA Cup semi-final, Liverpool won the first Merseyside derby at the new Wembley. Everton took the lead through Nikica Jelavić in the first half. Luis Suárez equalised for Liverpool midway through the second half, and Andy Carroll scored the Liverpool winner with a header in the 87th minute.[34]
On 28 January 2014, Liverpool recorded their biggest ever Premier League win against Everton and biggest at Anfield since 1972, a 4–0 home win with goals from Steven Gerrard and two from Daniel Sturridge in the first half. Luis Suárez scored the fourth goal in the second half, with Sturridge also missing a penalty that sailed over the bar. The win was Liverpool's biggest victory in the Derby since 1982, and their biggest at Anfield since 1972.[56]
On 20 April 2016, Liverpool repeated the 4-0 victory at Anfield on new manager Jurgen Klopp first experience of a Merseyside derby with goals from Divock Origi, Mamadou Sakho, Daniel Sturridge and Philippe Coutinho. Ramiro Funes Mori received the 21st red card of this fixture after a challenge on Origi and was seen kissing the badge after being sent off by referee, Robert Madley. It was regarded as one of the most one-sided games between the two teams with Liverpool having 37 shot attempts compare to Everton's 3.[57]
It is quite rare for either team to beat the other in both league games in one season; Liverpool have managed it 14 times and Everton nine times. Liverpool completed the treble in 2011–12 when they defeated their rivals on 14 April in the FA Cup semi-final, 2–1.
With cup games, replays and so on, the two have often met three or four times a season, but in the 1986–87 season, they played each other six times: starting with a 1–1 draw at Wembley in the Charity Shield, there were the two league games, the two-legged Screen Sport Super Cup Final (held over from the previous season), and a League Cup 5th round tie. Despite the fact that Everton finished the season as champions, they could not beat Liverpool that year, with four losses and two draws. A combined total of 281,356 spectators saw the six matches. The following season they met a further four times, being paired in both cups: honours were even with two wins each.
Liverpool have achieved the most Premier League doubles over their city rivals Everton, doing so four times in the last ten years. Everton have yet to do the double over Liverpool in the Premier League – their last league double over Liverpool was in 1985 where they won at Goodison (1–0) and Anfield (1–0) to complete a treble for that season, having also won at Wembley in the Charity Shield.
Fixtures from 1894 to the present day featuring League games, FA Cup, League Cup, Charity Shield and Super Cup.[58][59] Testimonial matches are listed separately. Other friendlies and Inter-War fixtures are not included.
Kilfoyle, P, (2000), Left Behind: Lessons From Labour's Heartland, Politico, London