But the result is all that matters and a point doesn’t do much for either team’s league position, even at this relatively early stage. Just the three league wins between the two sides now in 12 games.
Gerrard is the Barclays Man of the Match – I’m not sure about that decision. He tells BT Sport that Everton got lucky.
“I think Phil Jagielka’s got them out of jail with a wonder strike so credit to him. It’s a once in a lifetime goal but I think we deserved to win.”
Of the recent criticism of his own displays, he says: “I’ll agree with the constructive criticism and I’ve been stifled in a couple of games when people have followed me around and I haven’t been able to shake them off. But then people take it too far and say that ‘he’s 34 and he can’t run and he’s finished’.
That’s it from me. Thanks for following the blog. Check the links above for live coverage of Manchester United v West Ham and Arsenal v Tottenham.
Full time: Liverpool 1 Everton 1. What a finish. There's absolutely no question that it's Everton who are leaving as the happiest side. I praised the cautious, pragmatic way Liverpool were playing out the game but I guess the end result is all that matters with that approach and Liverpool's couldn't run down the clock, though you can hardly legislate for a goal of that quality from Phil Jagielka. It could have been even worse for Brendan Rodgers as Barry nearly won it with practically the final kick of the game.
90+3 min: Everton are going for a second now. They win a free kick on the right. Baines takes it cleverly and Barry meets it with a flick and it’s not very far away at all.
Phil Jagielka stuns Anfield with a late equaliser (PA)
GOAL! Liverpool 1 Everton 1 (Jagielka 90+1) What. A. Strike. From Phil Jagielka. Rio Ferdinand could never do that. Everton are piling on the pressure in injury time. Lovren heads clear McGeady's dinked cross. Jagielka meets it 25 yards out and hits a rising half-volley which crashes off the underside of the bar and into the net in front of a stunned Kop.
90 min: Three minutes of stoppage time.
88 min: Everton are probing and pressing but there’s little room for manoeuvre with 10 Liverpool players behind the ball. Eto’o threads a pass through to Naismith but Gerrard snuffs out the danger, conceding the corner. It’s a poor delivery from the set piece and Liverpool clear. Baines then foul throws.
87 min: Brendan Rodgers makes his second change and Balotelli will not get his derby goal. His number goes up and Rickie Lambert comes on.
85 min: The flip-side of that pragmatism is that Liverpool are now sitting back hoping to see out the game (or perhaps snatch a second on the counter). McGeady tries his luck from distance but it’s miles over the bar.
82 min: Liverpool are winding down the clock well now. They’ve been quite solid this half. They haven’t created a huge amount but since the goal they’ve played wisely and with a bit of intelligence, which hasn’t always been the
81 min: Samuel Eto's shootd from distance. It sails over the bar.
80 min: Effort #3452 by Mario Balotelli in is attempt to get a derby goal. Again it’s from long range – this time he cuts across it and swerves wide of Howard’s left hand post.
79 min: Good hustle from Balotelli who chases back and robs Besic, who is promptly hauled off and replaced by Eto’o.,
78 min: Samuel Eto'o is about to come against the team he nearly joines but didn't.
76 min: It’s Liverpool who look more likely to get the next goal and Lallana drifts a cross towards Balotelli but it’s too high and Mario drops to the ground holding his face.
75 min: Can Everton get back into this? They need to up their game significantly if they are.
72 min: Everton make a chance as Browning comes on for Hibbert.
69 min: Liverpool are now taking their time on the ball and keeping possession. Strangely Everton don’t seem that bothered about closing them down. Eventually they’re forced to as Coutinho jinks into the area. His shot is blocked and Henderson fires the rebound straight at Howard.
Mario Balotelli hits the crossbar (ACTION)
66 min: Balotelli hits the crossbar. It's Sterling who bombs down the left. He plays a beautiful cross into the centre where Balotelli meets it with a left-footed, close range volley which comes off the top of the bar. It's actually clipped Howard's shoulder on the way so must go down as a brilliant save.
65 min: Big chance for Lukaku to equalise straight away but he fails to get any contact on a header from close range.
65 min: The consensus seems to be that Gerrard has answered his critics with that goal. Most of the criticism seemed to be that he wasn't suitable to a defensive midfield holding role so I'm not sure what scoring a free kick has to do with that but it was a great goal from Gerrard nonetheless.
Steven Gerrard opens the scoring (GETTY)
GOAL! Liverpool 1 Everton 0 (Gerrard 64) Balotelli wants to take it - Gerrard says no chance. He steps up and curls it over the wall. It's not quite in the corner and Howard gets a big hand to it but can't keep it out. Cue: wild celebrations.
62 min: Balotelli wins a free kick at the edge of the area and it’s just as well for the Italian. He had ignored team-mates in better positions. He has his eye on a derby goal.
61 min: Everton move forward for the first time this half. It’s the left-to-right ball that has been their main outlet all day and it again works as Lukaku peels wide, collects the pass and plays to Naismith who hits a swerving drive which Mignolet saves.
59 min: Coutinho replaces Markovic.
58 min: Liverpool try to work some incisive passing on the edge of the Everton area but they all seem to be getting in each other’s way. Balotelli then thumps one but it takes a deflection and Howard gathers.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Henry Winter - Stones &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23efc" target="_blank"&gt;#efc&lt;/a&gt; makes occasional mistakes but what a prospect, superb timing to nick ball from under flying feet of Sterling &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23lfc" target="_blank"&gt;#lfc&lt;/a&gt; in the area&lt;/noframe&gt;
57 min: Sterling scampers forward but Stones makes a great challenge.
56 min: Not much on offer from Everton so far this half. The game has gone pretty flay. Coutinho is about to come on for Liverpool, presumably in place of Markovic.
54 min: Liverpool win a free kick after Sterling, Lallamna and Balotelli hunt down McCarthy who ends up bringing down Balotelli.
51 min: Sterling wins a corner on the left. Liverpool take it short and quick: Sterling floats a cross to the back post where Balotelli appears to get in Lovren’s way and puts off his team-mate who was arriving at pace.
49 min: Liverpool want Hibbert booked as he follows through on a challenge on Balotelli. The two now exchange words – can Everton succeed where they failed with Diego Costa and get a rise out of a potentially combustible striker?
47 min: Everton counter and McGeady wins a corner which Gerrard heads clear. Sterling then plays a lovely ball over the top which Markovic runs onto. He collapses to the ground but it would be the softest of penalties. I don’t mean to pick on Markovic but he has been very poor. Pace was meant to be his biggest weapon but he doesn’t appear to have any.
46 min: Another penalty appeal for Liverpool as Balotelli goes down under a challenge from Besic as Everton make a total mess of dealing with a nothing cross. It’s actually Jagielka rather than Besic who makes the challenge. Either way it’s not a penalty.
Peep! The second half is underway as the sun shines down on Anfield.
The teams are back on the pitch ... and Brendan Rodgers is giving Raheem Sterling and Jordan Henderson some detailed instructions.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Henry Winter - &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23lfc" target="_blank"&gt;#lfc&lt;/a&gt; 0 &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23efc" target="_blank"&gt;#efc&lt;/a&gt; 0 h-t. Not a classic Derby. Lacks edge strangely. Moreno, Lallana, Henderson, Stones, Howard decent. Final ball poor. Good pitch&lt;/noframe&gt;
Half time: Liverpool 0 Everton 0. A hugely entertaining 0-0 but a 0-0 nonetheless.
45 + 1 min: Swift counter-attack from Liverpool this time as Henderson and Lallana help the ball on to Gerard who decides that the steam train that is Alberto Moreno is a better option to drive forward. He does just that, slips the ball to Sterling on the left but Stones sticks out a foot and clears before it reaches Balotelli.
45 min: Two minutes of stoppage time.
43 min: Get Obama on the phone. Tim Howard is having one of those games. It’s Henderson who intercepts Barry’s pass and pings it towards Sterling who outpaces the Everton defence and shoots left footed by Howard makes a fine save.
42 min: Another effort from Balotelli – that’s 378 so far today. He shifts and shuffles on the edge of the area and tries a curling shot but it’s an easy save for Howard.
41 min: Skrtel is back on as Lukaku threatens on the counter.
40 min: Balotelli wins a corner on the left. Lallana takes it – it’s headed back to him and he tees up Markovic, who tries to curl one but it’s high and wide.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: James Tyler - Enjoying the Rodgers vs. Martinez "gesture-off." Both masters of the bizarre tactical hand movement.&lt;/noframe&gt;
36 min: Lallana and Markovic link up but the Serbian gets the ball stuck under his feet a bit and can’t find his team-mate. Balotelli then drags a shot wide, but of more concern to Liverpool will be an injury to Martin Skrtel who landed awkwardly on his ankle when jumping with Naismith, who is proving a menace to the Liverpool defence in a number if ways. Kolo Toure is Liverpool's defensive option on the bench. This is not a good option.
33 min: Great pass from Henderson in the inside right channel. Manquillo races on to it and squares but Balotelli isn’t there. Balotelli is furious but he didn’t exactly help the Spaniard with his run. Lukaku then has a deflected shot which Mignolet saves easily.
32 min: Everton come straight up the other end and McGeady tries to find Naismith with a clever pass but Mignolet gathers. The better option for Mcgeady may have been Lukaku at the edge of the area.
31 min: Balotelli should score. It’s great play from Moreno on the left. He digs out a beautiful cross. Balotelli is unmarked six yards out but fails to connect with his header.
30 min: Aiden McGeady comes on for Mirallas.
Kevin Mirallas' game is over (PA)
29 min: Kevin Mirallas' hamstring has gone and his afternoon is over. He pulled up as he raced down the left and looks in a lorra lorra pain.
28 min: Gerrard’s first real offensive involvement is crossfield ball to Sterling who plays it to Henderson. He twists one way and then the other and then hits a rasping drive which Howard beats away. Gerrard can’t quite gather at the edge of the area
Baines robs Markovic in the Liverpool area
25 min: Very nearly 1-0 to Everton. It’s a cross from the right which Liverpool fail to clear. It comes to Markovic who seems unaware that someone may close him down. He tries to run it out of the area but gets robbed on his blindside by Baines. Markovic stands flapping his arms in the air as Baines squares across the goal but there’s no one there and Lovren thumps clear before someone can tap into the empty net.
24 min: Balotelli looks lively so far. He cuts in from the left but his shot is locked and the flag is up.
22 min: Manquillo wins a corner on the right. Gerrard takes it, Skrtel appears to head it clear. Moreno gathers and let's fly and someone in one of the highest seats on the Kop has just caught a football.
20 min: Sterling goes down the left and squares but neither Balotelli or Lallana can get a shot on goal. Everton counter through Naismith, he’s forced to check and wait for support but keep possession. They work it to Lukaku on the right and he cuts inside and tests Mignolet with a powerful rising shot from the edge of the area.
19 min: The pace of the game has dropped in the past couple of minutes. I’m not going to lie. It’s a welcome respite.
17 min: And now Everton have a period of pressure but can’t quite force an effort at goal as Besic’s poorly hit volley is thumped away by Skrtel. As an aside, for a £20m footballer Lazar Markovic looks like he’s never really played football before.
16 min: Besic tries to find Lukaku over the top but his pass is too heavy.
15 min: Balotelli is down holding his calf as Liverpool bomb forward without their centre forward. The impressive John Stones comes across and snuffs out the danger.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Henry Winter - Agbonlahor &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23avfc" target="_blank"&gt;#avfc&lt;/a&gt; and Downing &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23whufc" target="_blank"&gt;#whufc&lt;/a&gt; closed down Gerrard &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23lfc" target="_blank"&gt;#lfc&lt;/a&gt; in previous league games, Naismith looks to have those duties for &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23efc" target="_blank"&gt;#efc&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
13 min: Balotelli spreads it wide to Manquillo who hits a beautiful first time cross towards Lallana and Stones is forced to head behind for a corner. Everton deal with this corner a bit better than the previous one but then Sterling and Skrtel exchanges passes and Sterling wins another corner. Tim Howard comes and claims this one.
10 min: Gerrard takes an outswinging corner and it’s met by a powerful header from Adam Lallana of all people. Howard goes full length and saves and Everton clear before Lovren can ram home the rebound.
9 min: Balotelli takes the free kick himself. It’s not the cleanest of strikes but it skips off the turf in front of Howard and he has to claw it behind for a corner.
Liverpool players appeal for a penalty (PA)
8 min: It has to be a penalty for Liverpool. Surely. It’s Barry who raises his arms he goes to block Sterling’s drive. He does block it but with his area. Martin Atkinson is right on the spot and says no. Barry is in the thick of it again as he brings down Balotelli. Liverpool want Atkinson to show a second yellow. Again he says nada. This is lively stuff.
6 min: Great chance for Balotelli who races on to Henderson’s pass. Howard stays big and saves but the flag was up anyway.
5 min: First effort on goal from Sterling, cutting in from the left, but it lacks power and Howard saves.
Moreno hauls down Lukaku on the edge of the area (ACTION)
4 min: Liverpool appear to have Lallana starting in behind Balotelli with Sterling left and Markovic right. It’s Everton who have the ball, however, as Lukaku bustles his way in from the right flank and goes down in the area as Moreno challenged. He wants a penalty – the ref says now. It was a foul, but I think it was outside the area.
3 min: After a lengthy delay as Everton players argue over the positioning of the ball Balotelli's clipped free kick hits the top of the wall.
1 min: Lively start from Liverpool and Lallana in particular who makes one run down the right and then another across the edge area where he is chopped down by Gareth Barry, who is shown a deserved yellow card. It's a shooting position. Balotelli, Henderson and Gerrard stand over it ...
Peeep! Martin Atkinson blows his whistle and we’re up and running.
12.44pm After an awful lot of shaking hands Everton appear to have won the toss and are making Liverpool attack the Kop in the first half.
12.40pm We're almost ready to go at Anfield. The teams are in the tunnel looking very, very serious. They know how important those bragging rights are. That's what's at stake here, isn't it?
12.35pm What is the source of Liverpool and Everton’s defensive frailties? Simon Mignolet seems to be bearing the brunt of Liverpool fans’ criticism but surely it can’t be as simple as that. Sure, Mignolet has looked extremely shaky but the constant tinkering with the back four by Rodgers, the absence of any real defensive protection from midfield and the departure of Suarez – the best defensive centre forward Liverpool have had since Ian Rush – are surely also contributing factors.
Injury problems haven’t helped Everton’s situation, with John Stones being shuttled from central defence to the right and back again. He’s in the centre today, where he has been at his best, while Tony Hibbert’s inclusion at right back will offer them greater defensive stability than if Seamus Coleman was there, though Coleman is clearly a major loss in an attacking sense.
12.15pm Roberto Martinez has referenced the fact that Everton's last victory at Anfield came on Sept 27 as a possible lucky omen for today. The words 'clutching' and 'straws' come to mind. Still, what a derby. The perfect mix of football drama, dogged defending, Steve Staunton going in goals and violence.
12.10pm Some of you may well be wondering right now what the hell is the Merseyside derby we keep banging on about. Well let Thom Gibbs explain
12.05pm Like all top pros, Mario Balotelli has nothing to chance in his preparations for today's game. He's been getting all the good stuff on board: pasta, chicken, water, electrolytes, helium ...
11.45am Team news from Anfield:
Liverpool: Mignolet; Manquillo, Skrtel, Lovren, Moreno; Henderson, Gerrard, Lallana; Sterling, Balotelli, Markovic. Subs: Brad Jones, Jose Enrique, Toure, Lambert, Coutinho, Lucas, Suso.
Everton: Everton: Howard; Hibbert, Stones, Jagielka, Baines; McCarthy, Besic, Barry; Naismith, Lukaku, Mirallas. Subs: Robles, Gibson, Eto'o, McGeady, Osman, Browning, Alcaraz
11.30am Good morning (or afternoon you're tuning in just before kick off) and welcome to live coverage of the Merseyside derby between Liverpool and Everton at Anfield.
The only thing that's certain about today's game is that win, lose or draw each manager will be talking about the positive elements of their team's display shortly after the final whistle. But that boundless optimism will surely grate with fans of the losing team.
But don't let the guru speak fool you - there's a huge amount at stake at Anfield. Liverpool have lost three of their five games so far and only looked any way convincing against a Spurs side who have since gone on to lose at home to West Brom.
Everton have the worst defence in the division - a stat that is skewed courtesy of the whirlwind 6-3 defeat at home to Chelsea - but with just one win in five games people with a vested interest in 'The People's Club' are starying to ask questions about why Roberto Martinez didn't add defensive cover in the summer when he had the chance.
While defeat for either side today isn't quite going to send them into full-blown crisis mode it would cause fans to revise whatever expectations they had for this season. Saying that, a draw isn't much good either. In short, this Merseyside derby is too close to call. Standby for team news and build up from Anfield.
10am Hello, and what a weekend of sport. As if it's not enough that one of the world's great sporting events is ongoing today, we're also being treated to the two biggest derbies in the Premier League (look away please people of Manchester).
At 5.30pm we can look forward to everyone's favourite north London spat, when Arsenal and Tottenham kick lumps out of each other. But before that it's Merseyside's turn.
It's 15 years to the very day since Everton last won at Liverpool. Since then, the odd draw apart, it's been tough times at Anfield for the Toffees. Whether they can reverse that this afternoon remains to be seen.
Evan Fanning will be here shortly with the best minute-by-minute coverage around. Until then, here are what we think the teams will be... email in to evan.fanning@telegraph.co.uk
Liverpool (Possible, 4-2-3-1): Mignolet; Moreno, Skrtel, Lovren, Manquillo; Gerrard, Henderson; Lallana, Coutinho, Sterling; Balotelli.  Out: Allen, Can, Flanagan, (all knee), Johnson (thigh). Tests: Coutinho (groin), Henderson (hip), Sturridge (thigh).
Everton (Possible, 4-2-3-1): Howard; Stones, Distin, Jagielka, Baines; McCarthy, Barry; McGeady, Naismith, Mirallas; Lukaku.  Out: Barkley, Koné (both knee). Tests: Coleman (head), Pienaar (thigh).