The Horseshoe casino in Cincinnati holds a farmer’s market and sustainability event
Cincinnati’s Horseshoe casino is holding its first Hometown Market at which local vendors sell locally sourced produce.
In an ever more competitive marketplace casinos are always on the look out for smart strategies by which they can attract more custom and raise their profiles, and to that end promotions of various forms are common, but in Cincinnati the Horseshoe Casino has taken the at first glance quite odd decision to hope a marketplace will assist it in the marketplace. The market in question? A farmer’s market.
• Local farmers sell goods indoors or out
• Is the Horseshoe casino strategy green or greed?
With green credentials always a useful addition Kevin Kline, general manager of the Horseshoe, has given the go ahead for the inaugural “Hometown Market” which sees local produce and businesses showcased in tandem with a green sustainability message. This means as well as live cooking demonstrations there will be presentations on growing roses, and waste management and recycling.
“Environment and community sustainability,” says Mr. Kline, sounding a tad too much like he’s running for public office, “are important core values of our business. Horseshoe Cincinnati’s property design and the inclusion of a one acre green space was done in an effort to create innovative events like the Hometown Market that can enhance and promote the connectivity and vitality of our surrounding communities.”
As competition increases we’re likely to see more of these efforts to woe local communities as catchment areas continue to shrink and the easy access of mobile casino gambling appeals to politicians who eye the tax revenues from licensing online entities. Local gamblers are likely to be ever more important to the survival of casinos who might once have relied more on traveling trade rather than closer range residents.
Tags: casino strategy, Cincinnati, Hometown Market, Horseshoe Casino, Kevin Kline, mobile casino gambling, smart strategies
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *