Abbey Clancy has lifted the Glitterball trophy as the winner of the grand final of Strictly Come Dancing 2013.
The Liverpudlian model has mastered the ballroom.
Abbey and professional partner Aljaz Skorjanec became the first couple this series to receive full marks from the judges, with her hip-shaking, crotch-thrusting Salsa and they also got a perfect score in the final.
But how did she manage it? And do you think Abbey deserved to win?
Model Abbey says the intense training has had a bizarre affect on her body as she gained half a stone – but lost her figure.
She says: “I’m heavier. I’ve got a six-pack. I’ve put on about half a stone. I don’t know where my boobs have gone. They’ve disappeared.”
She and dance partner Aljaz Skorjanec have turned to fast food to fuel the tough training sessions.
She says: “You just have to eat all the time – we’ve got a Nando’s on one corner and a McDonald’s on the other. Which helps.”
The Liverpudlian lingerie model, who is married to footballer Peter Crouch, is genuinely thrilled to have made it to the final.
“I’m made up that we’ve got this far. Pete’s shocked as well that we’ve found ourselves in the final. He’s only ever seen me dance in a nightclub and not that well. He’s really happy and so proud of us.”
Abbey admits she suffers from nerves every week. “Before this, I’d never performed to an audience, in front of a crowd. With my job, it’s me and a photographer. This is so scary.”
When the call from the BBC came, she had to be persuaded to do Strictly by celebrity pals who had done the show before, including Kelly Brook, Lisa Snowdon and Harry Judd.
She says: “The thought of doing it was terrifying. But I spoke to a few friends and they said, ‘Go for it’.”
She has no regrets. “Getting covered in tan and diamonds from head to toe every week and dancing with one of the best ballroom dancers in the world – you can’t not like it.
“I’m going to miss it so much.”
But she claims her eye is not on the prize. “It’s never been like a competition. Everyone’s rooting for each other. We go out every week and have fun.”
* Strictly Come Dancing's final airs Saturday 21 December at 6.30pm on BBC One
Check out all of Abbey's dances below and let us know what you think in the comments.