22.47 "The worst dirty tricks we saw were from Chelsea surrounding the referee, says Jamie Carragher. They'll be very successful, very respected but his teams will never be loved."
I would like to toast PSG in their determination and moreover the plastic cockneys who gave me so much stick over City losing against Barca at home and losing to Liverpool. The word I think is called karma!
I want to discuss that [why they folded] with the players tomorrow. I want to know their feelings, what they felt on the pitch. Our performance was not good enough we need to find conclusions. The opponent was stronger than us, they coped better with the pressure of the game. Because they were with 10 men we felt more the pressure, they had nothing to lose. We felt the extra pressure and couldn't cope with that. we concede two goals at set pieces. The organisation is the same. We try to go for the game, we felt too much when they went to 10 men the pressre. Collectively they were better than us, I don't have much to say apart from to tell them [PSG] they deserved to win and they have reason to celebrate. They were aggressive, they were clever - they closed out the game which we couldn't do when we were 1-0 up with five minutes to go. They did simulation, preparing a change. The game was gone. I wouldn't call it dirty I would call it clever.
Bryan Craker writes
Pleased for Laurent Blanc who has been under pressure from the PSG owners and yet shows the same class as a coach as he did as a player. The anti-Mourinho.
Jamie Carragher I've seen Mourinho teams outfootballed at times. I've never seen them outmuscled. PSG are a men's team.
We did a great game. When we lost Ibra, one of the best playres, we say keep simple, play with the ball at the feet, because we need to score. We say let's believe until the end. It's amazing for everyon,ne we played a great game. We have a long way to go in the Champions League we have to keep our feet on the floor. My circle finished in Chelsea and I had a great opportunity at PSG. I was very happy at Cjhlsea. I respevct everyone. I said before I didn't celebrate but I was so emotional I could not stop. Thank you to the Chelsea fans.
22.27 Whatever he says - PSG deserve huge praise. Verratti, Matuidi and Thiago Motta were terrific.
22.24 It'll be interesting to see if Mourinho goes for his post-Bradford withering rage at his team or whether he'll turn back to his old distraction tricks.
PSG go through. There is a God!
Jamie Carragher gives an excoriating state of the nation assessment:
"Where it leaves our league? Chelsea are the best team in our league. We are miles away. Think of the TV deal and the money the clubs have got. Verratti - we'd love him in our league. Motta. Thiago Silva apart from his handball was outstanding. We are supposed to be the richest league in the world.We are being kidded with the players we are bringing in."
Peep! Peep! Peep! Chelsea have been knocked out of the Champions League by 10-man PSG on the away goals rule.
120+1 min Rabiot goes down under a challenge from Fabregas and surely there's no coming back now. They'll tale a minute to get this ball back.
120 min Mourinho smiles as PSG take it into the corner.
119 min PSG are expertly running down the clock. Wasting time, buying fouls. Turning up toes to treat cramp. There'll be two minutes' added on.
118 min When Courtois saved Thiago Silva's first header from the corner, Gary Neville pointed out that Chelsea don't deploy players on the posts. I wonder if one could have reached that second,scoring header?
117 min Ivanovic joins the forward line as Van der Wiel replaces Pastore.
116 min Chelsea have been a shadow of themselves. I can't put my finger on what's wrong. I've never seen them this hesitant under Mourinho.
GOAL!! Chelsea 2-2 PSG (Thiago Silva) Wow! From the second corner Thiago SIlva meets it from 12 yards and loops it superbly into the top left corner, beating John Terry to it. Oh dear. No English clubs in the last eight?
113 min Nervy defending gives PSG a corner that Thiago Silva meets brilliantly flush on the forehead and Courtois dives to his left to palm superbly away for another corner ...
111 min Pastore tracks through the middle from the left on a surging diagonal run before releasing a pass for Cavani on te right of the box which he prods straight into Azpilicueta's shins.
109 min Willian concedes a free kick by straddling Pastore from behind as he scarpered clear but PSG waste it by not clearing the first man.
108 min Cahill resorts to the 'Row Z' clearance after some dainty footwork from Pastore ends with a misplaced pass to Cavani.
106 min The crowd have begun to find their voices. PSG carry on where they left off, patiently probing.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Garry Hayes - It's getting tasty in the dugouts here. Words exchanged between Cabaye and a member of the &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23CFC" target="_blank"&gt;#CFC&lt;/a&gt; back room team. Few hand gestures, too.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Half time They have improved in extra time. But they are in a precarious position.
104 min Brilliant turn on the left from Diego Costa when he rolls his man is deemed a foul by the referee, an absurd decsion to match some others tonight.
102 min Costa darts into the box from the left as Hazard dances through the middle. He threads the apss from the edge of the area but Marquinhos matched him and just whipped it away as Costa slid in to shoot.
100 min PSG free kick 30 yards out and David Luiz tries one of his specials, the Cristiano Ronaldo strike down on the ball that sends it up over the wall but with enough dip to squeeze under the crossbar. Courtois scampers to his left to palm it over for a corner which comes to naught.
98 min They've been much better since they scored and now work a quick triangle between Hazard, Drogba and Azpilicueta that frees Hazard on a run into the box from the left. he goes flying when Sirigu comes out to clear the ball behind for a corner, not the penalty he was hoping for.
GOAL!! Chelsea 2-1 PSG (Hazard, pen) He gave him the eyes and stroked it cutely straight down the middle as Sirigu toppled over as he tried to correct his inclination to buy the dummy.
Penalty to Chelsea! Zouma went up for a steepling header in a challenge with Thiago Silva whose hand shot up above his opponent's head and brushed the ball with his fingers.
94 min Chelsea corner off a shot from Willian 20 yards out that is blocked away.
93 min Great footwork from Fabregas in a very tight space at the edge of the box and he prods it to Willian, hoping for the return as he peeled off to the right. Willian goes for goal though and the ball is whipped away off his toe.
92 min Long ball up the right from Cahill bounces into the area, ramps over Drogba and Sirigu catches but not before taking out Thiago Silva.
91 min Didier Drogba celebrates his 37th birthday by coming on to replace Ramires.
Guess who's back? #CHEPSG http://t.co/1VauyUlOCx pic.twitter.com/fJK5OycrXi
19.33 How would you characterise Geoff Shreeves' line of pre-match questioning? It's Alcibiades isn't it? Find a flattering fact, lay it on with a trowel, bask in the glow of his subject's radiant pleasure. Or Lord Melchett to the Virgin Queen.
19.28 'We try to win,' says Jose Mourinho. Thank goodness for that.
19.26 Chelsea send a message about the etiquette of being human to their fans as well as how to behave on public transport in Paris and London.
19.15 Graeme Souness and Thierry Henry think he's great and Jamie Carragher thinks he's 'fantastic but the level just below the elite'. Ach. Really. He makes the people happy. That's the best judgment.
19.11 Sky are doing this 'Is Zlatan really any good' thing again 'especially against English clubs'. he's great. Celebrate him. It's like asking Paul McCartney if the White Album would be better as a single long player. "It's the Beatles' White Album," he said. "Come off it." He's Zlatan for heaven's sake. He's outstanding.
19.05 Coverage has begun on Sky Sports with Thierry Henry dressed as Roderick Spode at Totleigh Towers. Jamie Carragher and Graeme Souness sit alongside Jeff Stelling who is paying his own homage to the late Leonard Nimoy with his eyebrows. Class act, Jeff.
18.52 So, in the traditional style. Your teams:
Chelsea Courtois; Ivanovic, Cahill, Terry (c), Azpilicueta; Fabregas, Matic; Ramires, Oscar, Hazard; Diego Costa. Subs Cech, Zouma, Filipe Luis, Willian, Cuadrado, Remy, Drogba.
PSG Sirigu; Marquinhos, Thiago SIlva, David Luiz, Maxwell; Verratti, Thiago Motta; Matuidi; Cavani, Ibrahimovic, Pastore.  Subs Douchez, Camara, Bahebeck, Digne, Lavezzi, Van der Wiel, Rabiot.
Is that Leeds United legend Zoumana Camara on the bench? It is, you know.
LINEUPS #CFC vs #PSG (via @StatsZone http://t.co/FjGJNstclP): pic.twitter.com/OpHktDMWcR
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Jonathan Johnson - Radio Marca report that Barcelona's Dani Alves has agreed to join PSG for free on a 3-year deal this summer. &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23PSG" target="_blank"&gt;#PSG&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23FCB" target="_blank"&gt;#FCB&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
18.44 Willian on the bench and Ramires on the right, presumably. Mourinho muts be concerned by the physical threat - and reckon that Willian's quick feet are best deployed against tiring players.
18.43  &lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Chelsea FC - Subs: Cech, Zouma, Filipe Luis, Willian, Cuadrado, Remy, Drogba. &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23CHEPSG" target="_blank"&gt;#CHEPSG&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
18.42  &lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Chelsea FC - Team to play PSG: Courtois; Ivanovic, Cahill, Terry (c), Azpilicueta; Fabregas, Matic; Ramires, Oscar, Hazard; Diego Costa. &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23CHEPSG" target="_blank"&gt;#CHEPSG&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
18.30 Somwhere over the rainbow. Weigh a pie.
Tous les yeux sont rivés sur Londres ce soir ! #LondonCalling pic.twitter.com/FC6GmohewQ
18.20 Gather round everyone as we prepare for tonight's second leg of the round of 16 Champions League tie between Chelsea and Paris Saint-Germain or oil v oil as other more impertinent commentators have described it. The match, as I'm sure you all know, stands poised at 1-1 after Edinson Cavani's equaliser at the Parc des Princes. Chelsea are aiming for their second European Cup - taking them from parity with Aston Villa to equality with Nottingham Forest - and Jose Mourinho his third. Chelsea have never lost at home to a French side, PSG have never won a competitive match in England and Mourinho has lost only once at home in four full seasons plus this one and the start of 2007-08. I'm looking forward to it - always a treat to watch Marco Verratti and Chelsea in full flow are a compelling sight.
Cesc Fabregas wants Chelsea to be ruthless in tonight's Champions League last-16 second leg with Paris Saint-Germain.
A 1-1 draw in Paris and Branislav Ivanovic's away goal gives the Blues a slender advantage entering the Stamford Bridge clash.
"If we can kill, we have to kill," Fabregas said.
Branislav Ivanovic scored for Chelsea in Paris. AP
"When we get one goal, we have to go for the second and after the second the third. That's the only thing we can really improve.
"Hopefully we will have that killer instinct."
Chelsea won the Capital One Cup on March 1 and have two remaining chances for silverware this term, in the Premier League and Champions League.
Spain international Fabregas feels the League Cup win - the first trophy of Jose Mourinho's second spell in charge of the Blues - could provide the belief for further success.
Reflecting on his experience with Spain, the World Cup and European Championship-winning playmaker said: "When we unlocked, mentally, that fear of quarter-finals or getting onto a really big stage, that's when we felt we could become champions.
"Once we were champions we were unstoppable. That's what we have to do. We have to believe we are the best, be mentally dominant and ready to cope with every situation."
Fabregas is yet to win the Champions League, but hopes to do so with Chelsea following his move from Barcelona last summer.
He is looking only at the immediate task, though.
"I want to win for Chelsea, I want to give my best and hopefully we will go through into the next round," Fabregas said.
"We'll go game by game. Sometimes the best team doesn't win. You have to be fortunate with the draw or your performance on the day.
"We have to take it to the next level. We want to go through. We have to make it happen."
Mourinho accused expensively-assembled PSG of being "the most aggressive" side Chelsea have played this season, more so than League Two Shrewsbury and League One Bradford.
Eden Hazard was fouled nine times during the first leg. GETTY IMAGES
"With players of such quality I was expecting more football and less aggression," he said.
"I thought an English team would never be surprised by aggression. In that game I was surprised, because a team with fantastic players was a team with the record of fouls, was the team that was making foul after foul, was the team that stopped (Eden) Hazard with fouls all the time."
PSG, eliminated on away goals by Chelsea last term, were on top for much of the first leg at Parc des Princes.
But Mourinho bristled when asked about PSG's dominance.
He said: "What is dominate? If dominate is the number of chances, yes, Paris had more chances than us.
"If dominate is to stop the opponent to play, making foul after foul, yes they also dominate.
"If dominate is to have the ball and to move the ball without progression, yes, they also dominate.
"I think they dominate in everything except in the result."
The Blues boss will hope the result goes in his side's favour again on Wednesday night and has no intention of playing conservatively.
He added: "We are going to try to win."
Join Rob Bagchi from 6.30pm for all the latest build-up plus live commentary
Did you know Telegraph Sport has a Chelsea Facebook page?