As you will have no doubt seen the leader board of the top 72 scores for Seve Day have now been announced for the final at The Belfry next month.
Since publishing this list we have had a number of emails from players querying some of the scores at the top of the leader board which appear particularly high, this is something that we have looked into and can confirm that all scores have been officially verified with the playing partners of those individuals as well as their golf clubs where possible.
We are shortly going to be opening discussions with a handful of players about making adjustments to their handicap for the final in light of these scores.
Seve Day is first and foremost a charity initiative, and we are grateful to every one of you who has signed up to take part and helped us to raise close to £35,000 for the Seve Ballesteros Foundation. We are fully aware however that for participants the opportunity to compete at the world famous Brabazon Course at The Belfry for a trip to the 2013 US Masters is a once in a lifetime opportunity, so are taking steps to ensure a level playing field.
We are keen to ensure that the integrity of Seve Day is not compromised, after all this fine sport is one that is built on honesty and sportsmanship. Whilst we have taken every possible measure to ensure a clear and transparent scoring system, it is always going to be impossible to completely guarantee the validity of every score and handicap.
Whilst restricting scorecards to those only submitted in registered club competitions would have provided a greater control over the scoring, this would have also made Seve Day inaccessible for non-club members and those unable to make it for a club competition.
By opening up the competition to scores submitted from any round, we were able to make Seve Day accessible to more golfers and raise many more thousands of pounds for the Seve Ballesteros Foundation.
For those of you who have reached the final we would like to extend our congratulations to you and wish you the very best of luck for the big day, and those that missed out we thank you once again for your support in carrying on Seve’s legacy.