PHENIX CITY, Ala., Dec. 12— 
Wagner College established superiority early today and went on to win the Division III football championship by defeating Dayton, 19-3, in the Amos Alonzo Stagg Bowl.
It was the first national title ever won by a team from the small college on Staten Island's Grymes Hill. In fact, the Seahawks had never gone this far in the National Collegiate Athletic Association football playoffs. Dayton won the title in 1980, and lost in the final the next season to Widener.
Today's contest came in two parts, the first half all Wagner's and the second half mostly Dayton's. In the first two quarters, the Seahawks scored their three touchdowns and outgained the Flyers in total yards, 342 to 70. Seahawks Slow Down
So it mattered not that Wagner had the ball for only 19 plays in the second half. Dayton hammered away at the Seahawk defense and managed only a field goal.
''They were just bigger, faster and better than we were,'' said Mike Kelly, Dayton's coach whose teams had lost just 16 of their previous 79 games. ''Their defense bent, bent, bent. But it never broke. Against a defense like that you're not going to run 15-16 plays on a drive without making mistakes. And we did.'' The victory was Wagner's 13th this season against one defeat, to Hofstra, 35-28, in October. Four of the victories came in the playoffs, over Rochester, Fordham, and Emory and Henry. Dayton finished 11-3.
Division III, with 206 teams, is by far the largest of the four N.C.A.A. football divisions and it is the play-for-fun group, with no athletic scholarships, no spring practices. Today's game was played before a crowd of 4,000 in an 8,000-seat high school stadium.
''I sure had fun,'' said George Gaspar, Wagner's defensive end who made several big plays. None were bigger than his knockdown of a Dayton pass near the Wagner goal line on fourth down, a play that ended the Flyers' last and best touchdown opportunity. Wagner Is Well Prepared
Walt Hameline, Wagner's 36-year-old coach, had his team well prepared.
''We thought Dayton would be so tough across the front on defense that we wanted to pass rather than try to run,'' he explained. ''We believed our receivers could get open.'' The offensive plan had the big quarterback, Greg Kovar, passing about half the time from a shotgun formation, where he could survey the field. That was new.
In the first half, Kovar, a 6-foot-5-inch junior from Hazlet, N.J., completed 16 of 25 passes for 273 yards. He threw two touchdowns passes, 22 yards to John Chaney and 22 to Keith Johnson.
''The shotgun helped me a lot,'' said Kovar, but Kelly disagreed.
The Dayton coach said: ''Their protection was so good, we couldn't get at him. So it didn't make any difference where he was when he let go of the ball.''
Wagner was in complete control until the second half. The Seahawks' attack did little while Dayton marched and marched but salvaged only a 39-yard field goal by Mike Duvic early in the third period.
After that, the Flyers were four times in position to score in the final quarter. But the threats were extinguished by a lost fumble, Gaspar's knockdown, an interception by Wagner's Bill Lynch at his 13 and a fourth-down incompletion.
Photo of Kevin Wilhelm, the Dayton quarterback, fumbling ball in first half, while Eric Jenkins, and Ron Langella of Wagner tried for the recovery (AP).