Watson will be taking a trip down memory lane next week.
months away from his 50th birthday, Watson will inevitably relive the week that
changed his life when the Open championship makes its Carnoustie comeback after
24 years.
It was
on the tough Scottish links in 1975 that the Stanford University psychology graduate
began a run which in the space of nine years was to take him within two holes
of matching Harry Vardon's record six Open titles.
Watson,
having defeated Australian Jack Newton in a play-off, went on to triumph as well
as Turnberry in 1977 (his never-to-be-forgotten 'Duel in the Sun' with Jack Nicklaus),
Muirfield in 1980, Troon in 1982 and then Birkdale the following year.
two Masters victories and the 1982 US Open - scene of his 71st hole chip-in to
thwart Nicklaus again - Watson's place among the greats of the game is secure.
his return to Carnoustie is with a definite aim. To par the 250-yard 16th, one
of the most demanding "short" holes in world golf.
Watson
failed to get his three in all four rounds of the 1975 championship and again
in the 18-hole play-off and he has said: "My goals this year are to get into
the Ryder Cup team and to par the 16th at Carnoustie.
I don't care if it is in the practice round."
Ryder Cup target looks a long way off, however. Watson missed the halfway cut
in six successive majors prior to last month's US Open, where he finally broke
that spell but finished only 57th.
he has not given up hope of tasting the big time again before he switches his
main attentions to the Seniors Tour.
"Winning
the Colonial last year enforces the feeling that I still have it. That I'm not
finished yet," he added.
never lost the belief that I could win another major. Even during the dark years
I figured something would happen."
so-called 'dark years' was the time between 1987 and 1996 when Watson failed to
have a single success on the US circuit and looked a complete mess over short
putts.
That was
never more apparent than the 1994 Open. Ten years on from the dramatic finish
at St Andrews, when Seve Ballesteros produced the highlight of his career to stop
Watson winning again, another opportunity to match Vardon's record presented itself
back at Turnberry.
Watson
led after seven holes of the final round, but as a moment of history beckoned
he horribly three-putted both the eighth and ninth greens and was never a factor
again.
He knows
that may prove to be his last chance.
Watson,
whose personal life took a bit of a battering when his wife of 25 years filed
for divorce at the end of 1997 and he admitted he was drinking more than was probably
wise, accepts that time is running out if he is to join Vardon.
I'm on I can play. But I'm off a lot now. I feel that some of my strength is not
there any more. My ability to turn and really create a lot of clubhead speed."
point was rammed home to him last year watching his 15-year-old son Michael play
in the Junior Open at Formby.
drove into heather six inches deep, but hit it onto the green. I can't do that
any more. I can't advance the ball very far, so I have to keep it in play. When
I do I have a chance."
US Open last month was Watson's 100th major and if he did make it a triumphant
return to Carnoustie he would become the oldest ever winner of any of the four
major championships.
cheer him in his attempt, though, it is perhaps worth remembering that Vardon
was runner-up in the US Open at the age of 50 and only last year Nicklaus finished
sixth in the Masters at 58.
Watson,
made an honorary member of the Royal and Ancient Club in May, still clearly remembers
his first experience of links golf.
was meant to be at Carnoustie, but on arriving from London and expecting to be
allowed on for a practice round he was told by then Royal and Ancient secretary
Keith Mackenzie that the course was reserved for qualifiers.
Instead
he took himself off to nearby Monifieth and recalls: "At the second or fourth
hole I hit a drive right down the middle of the fairway. We started looking and
I was about ready to give up and went over to a pot bunker about 30 yards left
and there it was - dead.
didn't like it at all, but by the late 1970s the subtleties had begun to make
an impression on me. Bob Jones went through the same adjustment. You have to realise
that golf - like life - is not meant to be fair.
I just can't get enough of it. It's a guessing game and I love that. There are
so many ways to get the ball to the hole and I get pleasure in trying to find
(Nicklaus) has always believed that the game should be played through the air.
I think he is only partially right. There are situations, especially with wind
and weather, that call for a ground game.
just call in the army rather than the air force."
did he become so good at it? "A lot of it has to do with my ability to get
the ball up and down in bad conditions. Seve was the absolute master of that.
You could put him in the gorse and still be sure he would make a par somehow.
kind of follow that track. I've been known to make a Watson par here or there.
the British Open didn't exist I'd still take a trip over every year just to play
the great courses."
even if he does not contend, it is worth listening to Watson to find out who might.
year at Birkdale he tipped O'Meara to win with a winning score of level par. Both
came true - and now Watson waits to see if his dreams do too.