Queens Park Rangers live score (and video online live stream*), team roster with season schedule and results.'
Queens Park Rangers is playing next match on 19. Nov 2016 against Norwich City in Championship.
When the match starts, you will be able to follow
Queens Park Rangers v Norwich City live score
standings, minute by minute updated live results and match statistics. We may have video highlights with goals and
news for some Queens Park Rangers matches, but only if they play their match in one of the most popular football leagues.
Queens Park Rangers previous match was against Nottingham Forest in Championship, match ended with result 1 - 1
Queens Park Rangers fixtures tab is showing last 100 football matches with statistics and
win/draw/lose icons. There are also all Queens Park Rangers scheduled matches that they are going to play in the future.
Queens Park Rangers performance & form graph is SofaScore
Football livescore
unique algorithm that we are generating from team’s last 10 matches, statistics, detailed analysis and our own
knowledge. This graph may help you to bet on Queens Park Rangers matches, but be aware of that SofaScore LiveScore accepts
no responsibility or liability for any financial or other loss, be it direct or indirect, as a result of any
action reliant on any of this website’s content.
In match details we offer link to watch online
Queens Park Rangers Norwich City live stream
sponsored by bet365. If this match is covered by bet365 live streaming you can watch Queens Park Rangers Norwich City
on your PC and on mobile - iPhone, iPad, Android or Windows phone.
Please note that
the intellectual property rights to stream such events are usually owned at a country level and therefore,
depending on your location, there may be certain events that you may be unable to view due to such restrictions.
Current Queens Park Rangers squad is:
Forwards: Abdenasser El Khayati, Jamie Mackie, Conor Washington, Sebastian Polter, Yeni N'Gbakoto, Idrissa Sylla
Midfilders: Karl Henry, Massimo Luongo, Tjaronn Chery, Michael Petrasso, Ben Gladwin, Axel Prohouly, Sandro, Ariel Borysiuk, Olamide Shodipo, Chris Paul, Pawel Wszolek
Defenders: Nedum Onuoha, Grant Hall, James Perch, Jack Robinson, Steven Caulker, Joel Lynch, Jake Bidwell, Jordan Cousins, Osman Kakay, Niko Hamalainen
Goalkeepers: Joe Lumley, Alex Smithies, Matt Ingram, Timothy Dieng
You can click on any player from the roster on the right and see his personal information such as nationality,
date of birth, height, preferred foot, position, player value, transfer history etc. There are also statistics
for each player in all competitions with all total played and started matches, minutes played, number of goals
scored, number of cards and much more. Queens Park Rangers top scorers list is updated live during every match.
SofaScore
football livescore
is available as iPhone and iPad app, Android app on Google Play and Windows phone app.
You can find us in all stores on different languages searching for "SofaScore". Install SofaScore app and
follow all Queens Park Rangers matches live on your mobile!