Someone's been listening to Brendan Rodgers' post-match comments with an acute ear
I thought Character played well tonight. Character showed a lot of Character even at 1 down. Character dug deep to show Character #lfc
And finally, Henry Winter's match report from the KC Stadium: Dawson leaves Liverpool devastated
Ramirez almost plays Hull into trouble when he can't get the ball out from under his feet and concedes the foul 30 yards inside the Liverpool half. Mignolet launches it but Alex Bruce heads it clear.
Sterling crosses straight to Harper. But with no one up front to hold onto it, back come Liverpool when Harper's punt is intercepted. Coutinho shoots low, a Barnes-Wallis from 20 yards that Harper swallows.
Liverpool are trying to walk it into the goal. Hull are playing 7-3-0 and there's no space for Lallana or Coutinho to play their threaded passes into.
Hull substitution, Rosenior on for N'Doye. There will be five minutes added on.
Hull almost pick off Liverpool on the break when N'Doye shrugs off Skrtel and picks out Elmohamady but again Allen's diligence saves the day, bursting his lungs to get back and concede the corner. Ramirez takes with only two up in the box so late in the game and Huddlestone reaches it but can't get his effort on traget.
Half chances for Markovic from an angle on the right is deflected behind. The number of bodies meant he would have had about a 16th of the goal to aim at and he missed his tiny target. Then Lallana, drifting in from the right, curls a shot past Harper's post and the keeper watches happily as it drifts past.
Good defensive work from Allen, sticking with Aluko who was twisting left and right to try to get a run at Skrtel and tackling him. Hull substitution - Ramirez on for the limping Quinn. It was going to be N'Doye who hasn't been as good as the previous two times I've watched him this season but Steve Bruce changed his mind.
Raheem Sterling shoots from the left of the box, arrowing a shot from the corner of the penalty area straight down Harper's throat. Coutinho had worked the opening but it would have taken a goal of the season finish to beat Harper from there.
Better on the other flank from Johnson who turns back on to his right foot and stands a cross up to the far post where Lambert has attempted to hide himself. McShane sees his run, stays in front of him and heads it away. On the bench Balotelli has a huge ice pack on his left ankle and the top of his foot.
Markovic Chris Lawlers his way down the right but his pass, aimed notionally at Lallana, is awful.
Coutinho attempts to slide a pass between Dawson and Chester down the inside left channel and overhits it so all Harper has to do is step over it to let it go out for a goalkick.
Hull corner gets the KC roaring as the cross is smashed past the post. Lovren is replaced by Markovic. The poor sod is going to play right-back.
Snap shot from Henderson has the power but not the direction to trouble Harper who doesn't have to move and blocks it. Brendan Rodgers is shown talking to Markovic with pen and paper, explaining what he'd like him to do when he comes on. What's the point? You need a goal. Tell him to do what the hell he likes to score for you.
Liverpool lack some spark, something to get their supporters off their seats. It's all nicety-nice with the odd shot from Henderson. Coutinho just needs to whack one.
Aluko, who has been lively and kept Liverpool's defenders on their toes, is one on one with Skrtel and takes a touch too many which allows the Titan of Tattoo to nick the ball away with his toe 20 yards out.
The packed Hull defence, augmented by the midfield reinforcements, makes penetration very difficult. Sterling, Henderson and Coutinho are buzzing around, shifting the ball between themselves as they try to make an inroad into the box but they run out of space yet again. leaving no room for error right by the byline and too often knocking it out because there is nowhere lese to go.
Double Liverpool substitution - Lambert and Lallana on for Balotelli and Ibe.
That was almost the equaliser when Coutinho fired in a lovely cross from the left that Henderson controlled on his chest then hit on the volley as he stretched for it. Harper got down low to pull off a fine save.
Quinn is penalised for sliding in on Can, tackling from behind but getting the ball. He tagged him in the followthrough, though, and that's why Probert gave it. Liverpool's fre-kick, 40 yards out towards the right. It's clipped to the far post where Skrtel has made his run but Elmohamady gets there first to nod it behind for a corner that Liverpool waste.
Sterling wins a corner after Henderson ups the tempo and stands the ball up to the far post where Sterling's effort is blocked. In comes the corner and Harper, unchallenged, plucks it out of the air.
Balotelli makes a diagonal run behind McShane in the inside right channel but the ball from Henderson is cut out by McShane who turns at the last possible moment to block it.
The 'Welsh Xavi' is penalised for a sliding tackle on Elmohamady which he rounds off by leaving his foot in. Hull take the free-kick and Aluko does a fine screening job up by the corner flag and beats two men before his surge is finally stopped.
Hull free-kick when Aluko's run up the touchline is blocked by Johnson. Brady whips it with his left foot from the right to the edge of the six-yard box. Mignolet comes for it and punches away from danger but takes out N'Doye with his hip and smashes Lovren in the spolar-plexus. The keeper's hip hit N'Doye on the chin but after some cold water on the head he is ready to resume.
Coutinho, the hotstepper, travels 20 yards on a dribble in from the left but the final ball is poor and he doesn't spy Sterling's run round the left-back.
The ref spots N'Doye's wardrobe error and tells him to go and get it changed, which he does with a smile.
What I don't understand about the way Liverpool are playing is that they had a perfectly serviceable right-back in Martin Kelly and yet keep using the inadequate Manquillo there or Can, who is a central midfielder. Now Can gives away a corner when Aluko tries to find N'Doye, who is now wearing Hernandez's shirt.
Liverpool up Dawson's creek so far. Balotelli really poor, needs to move up about three gears. Can is a midfielder not a defender.
Entertaining game so far with the defensive frailties of Liverpool at full-back and at tracking runners when the ball is in the air exposed. But with Coutinho, Ibe and Sterling linking up well they look like scoring, too.
Here's Dawson's tungsten-neck header:
You're in the loop, so please tell Brendan that if he's serious about bringing silverware to Anfield, he's going to need a stripey jumper and a bag marked 'Swag'.
Me, loop? Touché, Shane.
Tremendous run from Johnson down the left, past Chester and to the byline. He scoots towards the near post and taps the ball through Harper's legs but Balotelli is a split-second behind the ball as it scoots across goal about a foot out. As soon as it goes beyond the far post the referee blows for half-time.
Going forward Liverpool have looked fine, particularly when Coutinho has the ball but Balotelli has twice gone for the more difficult pass and lost possession.
Actually, scratch that. Lord knows what system they're playing at the moment.
Rodgers, the Tinkerman, has changed his system with Ibe as a right wing-back and Can in central midfield.
Cross from Ibe after good work from Balotelli, driving on a diagonal run and knocking the ball out to the right. Ibe cut it back towards Henderson who met it on the volley and hit it straight to Harper's right and he easily smothered it. The Hull crowd was booing because it came after they were given the advantage following Lovren's foul but the initiative switched in a heartbeat and Liverpool countered.
GOAL!! Hull 1-0 Liverpool (Dawson) Hull win a corner because Can can't play as a right-back in a four and Aluko forces him to concede it. It's taken long from the left, headed out and Elmohamady picks it up 25 yards out and chips a diagonal cross over the top of the defence and Dawson, played onside by Balotelli, nodded a firm header past Mignolet.
Tenacious defending from Jordan Henderson stops Quinn, who has peeled off to the left, getting past him as Quinn tried to out-lollipop him with a sequence of turns. After the third he just watched the ball and booted it out. Good work from Huddlestone to distribute it after reading Quinn's run.
Hull have a bank of five and a bank of four when Liverpool have the ball which makes them very difficult to get through though Can almost pulls it off when he spots Ibe's dart between Brady and McShane but overclubs his pass and sends it skipping beyond the sprinting winger and into touch.
Dawson catches Henderson late and with snide force - though it looked accidental. Altogether now: 'He's not that sort of player.' The ref gives him the benefit of not even whistling it as a foul.
Managers' disdain for orthodox full-backs is almost shown up again when Brady roasts Can and spins in a terrific cross that Aluko directs towards goal, Mignolet claws away and N'Doye's effort from the rebound.
Sterling manages to draw Chester out to the right where he exposes his lack of pace with a spurt past him to the by-line. He drags back a low cross to Balotelli who has his back to goal about 12 yards out and he gives it the power back-heel - neat improvisation that almost comes off but Harper gets down to catch it despite the surprise element.
Liverpool have wrested the upper hand with penetrating runs from Coutinho and Ibe around the back, the latter getting on the end of a long cross from the left, taking it on the volley wide of the far post and hooking it into the box past Brady who failed to block it but McShane whips it away a yard infront of Balotelli.
Coutinho gets away with a studs-up tackle on Aluko and then gets on the end of a training-ground corner as he peeled to the nearpost and shot on the half-volley. Harper saw it late as it flashed through the box and palmed it away.
Hull free kick 40 yards out, taken by Brady with his left foot from the right. The ball is over the heads of Dawson and N'Doye but Skrtel either didn't get a call or hear it so decides to backhead it out for a corner, which is well defended.
That's Coutinho at his best, darting on a diagonal run from the left towards the middle of the park he clips a pass down the side of Chester for Johnson's run into the box. The stand-in left-back shanks his shot as he slips and gives Harper a cricked nec as he looked up to see where it landed at the back of the stand.
Rather odd pass from Balotelli almost puts his side in danger when he clips it right back to Can instead of Allen and it takes the midfielder's watchfulness to stop Brady when he intercepts.
Ball up from Can is taken by Ibe 20 yards inside his own half with his back to the Hull goal and Brady leans into him to shove him over. The free kick is worked up the Liverpool left but Sterling cannot find Coutinho because Huddlestone has tracked back to bolster the defence even more.
Ibe is playing wide right with Can at right-back and Johnson at left-back. Twice he wins the ball back and has a run at Brady but Hull have their defence lined up in a five rather than three at the moment and they squeeze any space very quickly.
Up come the centre-halfs, Brady takes it and it's headed back out. Hull recycle it out to the left where Aluko beats Can and stands up a cross towards the penalty spot and N'Doye meets it crisply and directs a header to Mignolet's right. The keeper dives across to save.
Aluko is playing off N'Doye and when a long ball up to the centre-forward was blocked, he won the second ball 30-odd yards out to the left of centre and Allen takes him down.
Balotelli takes the free kick himself, strikes the wall and the ball is deflected out for a corner that is wasted and easily cleared by Hull.
Elmohamady again makes a run forward from the throw and squares it but the pass is intercepted and sent out to the left where Ibe takes it 15 yards and plays it inside to Balotelli whose heels are clipped 35 yards out by Huddlestone. Balotelli raises his arm to remonstrate with Huddlestone and touches him.
Hull begin with an attack up the right, Elmohamady chiping it into the box for Livermore's run past Aluko and N'Doye but Skrtel hets there and whacks it out for a throw.
7.44pm Rodgers and Bruce embrace. It's on.
7.41pm The teams exit the tunnels. Steven Gerrard has been rested so he can play at the weekend, according to Brendan Rodgers.
7.35pm A lifelong Hull fan gets ready for the match.
7.30pm Mario Balotelli warms up. It's always him etc. I like him but think he's in the wrong country and playing for the wrong club.
7.17pm Who do you think dances better? Ahmed Elmohamady or the Liverpool quartet?
7.10pm What's at stake tonight? Three points for Liverpool would give them a three-point lead over Tottenham Hotspur in fifth place and move them up to four points behind Manchester United in fourth with four games each to play.
Victory or a draw for Hull would move Steve Bruce's side above Aston Villa to 15th, in the first instance by two points, in the second on goal difference. A win would give them a four-point lead over Sunderland in 18th place who will not play their game in hand (Arsenal away) until 20 May, and put them three points in front of Leicester in 17th, who play Chelsea on Wednesday night.
6.52pm In the even more traditional style:
PHOTO: This evening’s official teamsheets for @HullCity vs @LFC at the KC Stadium #HULLIV pic.twitter.com/etrEN72RrJ
6.50pm And in the traditional style:
Hull City Harper; Chester, Dawson, McShane; Elmohamady, Livermore, Huddlestone, Quinn, Brady; Aluko, N'Doye. Subs McGregor, Rosenior, Figueroa, Bruce, Ramirez, Hernandez, Sagbo.
Liverpool Mignolet; Can, Skrtel, Lovren; Johnson, Henderson, Allen, Ibe; Sterling, Coutinho; Balotelli. Subs Jones, Toure, Lambert, Manquillo, Lallana, Brannagan, Markovic.
TEAM NEWS: Here's the @HullCity team to face @LFC in tonight’s #BPL clash at the KC Stadium #HULLIV pic.twitter.com/PCv520GVZa
Mignolet, Can, Lovren, Skrtel, Johnson, Henderson, Allen, Ibe, Sterling, Coutinho, Balotelli. #LFC
Confirmed #LFC subs v @HullCity: Jones, Toure, Lambert, Manquillo, Lallana, Brannagan, Markovic
6.39pm Since Hull City’s first promotion to the Premier League in May 2008, the two clubs have met seven times with Liverpool winning three, drawing three and losing just the one, Hull's 3-1 home victory last season when Martin Skrtel's own goal capped a terrible performance from the visitors.
Hull's home record includes the 0-0 draw in May 2010 after their relegation had been confirmed and which turned out to be Rafa Benítez's last match as Liverpool's manager. Their most recent meeting, a 0-0 draw at Anfield in October, preceded three defeats for Liverpool, when City had their third-string keeper Eldin Jakupovic to thank for the point.
6.35pm The teams will be announced at 6.45pm after they are handed in to Lee Probert, but a grass on Twitter is foghorning his steer that Steven Gerrard will not be in Liverpool's starting XI. Whether that's true or not, I couldn't tell you.
6.30pm Good evening. We will have the team news for you imminently, but the pre-match team news was as follows: Mohamed Diamé who has made two appearances from the bench in April since returning from four months' absence with a knee injury, is in contention to start. Andy Roberston could return, too, though Robbie Brady played well on the left at Selhurst Park. Nikica Jelavic (knee) and Curtis Davies (thigh) are expected to miss out.
Daniel Sturridge has been ruled out for the season which leaves either the option of Mario Balotelli, Fabio Borini or one of the Diddymen from Knotty Ash upfront.
Adam Lallana (groin) returned as a substitute in the goalless draw at West Brom on Saturday but defender Mamadou Sakho (thigh) and midfielder Lucas Leiva (thigh) are not expected to be in contention until Saturday when QPR visit Anfield.
Some Liverpool fans are boycotting the game. A move this MBMer thoroughly supports. You can get in touch via rob.bagchi@telegraph.co.uk should you wish.
It's a shame it has to come to this, but we can't allow fans to be priced out of OUR game #BoycotHull #LFC @paddock5 pic.twitter.com/0gu4b6s0w6
Hull defender Michael Dawson is convinced his side can move to the brink of Premier League safety with victory over Liverpool at the KC Stadium tonight.
Saturday's 2-0 win at Crystal Palace lifted them out of the drop zone ahead of a high-profile run-in which sees four of their final five games of the season at home.
Dawson said: "It's going to go right to the wire but we have got to concentrate on what we do and with two more wins I'm sure we'll be safe.
"But it's not good talking about it - we've got to go out and perform. Saturday was a start and we have now got to go out there and play with confidence and freedom."
Dame N'Doye's double at Selhurst Park gave a major boost to City's survival hopes given the likes of Arsenal and Manchester United are still to follow Liverpool to the KC Stadium.
But Dawson is undaunted, insisting: "We've been away from home and picked up big results against Manchester City, Arsenal and Liverpool.
"In two of those games we were leading until the final five minutes or so so we have got to take confidence and belief from those games and bring it to the KC."
Boss Steve Bruce could see his injury problems eased as Andy Robertson and Mohamed Diamé return to contention but David Meyler remains suspended.
Liverpool have struggled for form since being dumped out of the FA Cup semi-finals by Aston Villa and have been hit with a further blow with the news Daniel Sturridge is likely to be out for the rest of the season.
Sturridge has missed the last three games with a hip problem and boss Brendan Rodgers said: "It has been difficult for Daniel.
"Daniel is a good lad who obviously wants to play and be working and helping the team.
"But it has just been one of those seasons where he has been very unfortunate and he has missed out. We are going to have to monitor that day by day and see where he is at."
The alternative strikers Mario Balotelli, Rickie Lambert and Fabio Borini have all failed to impress and strengthening the attack is likely to be a transfer market priority this summer.
Rob will be here from 6.30pm to bring you team news, build up and live coverage