Atletico Baja - Trash both in the stands and on the field
Brownsville Barracuda - Trash both in the stands and on the field
Cedar Rapid Rampage - 1 mildly successful year at the box office, terrible results on field.
Chicago Mustangs - Attendance and performance both spiked for this team last year, quality team.
Dallas Sidekicks - No longer relevant on the field, the attendance took a dip and people we're already talking no more 'kicks by mid-season last year... how long can you depend on them in the current state?
El Paso Coyotes - Who knows? Same boat as Florida Tropics.
Las Vegas Legends - Quality performing team on the field, absolutely abysmal attendance. Embarrassment to the league with the last 2 playoff fiasco's, and we're on the absolute brink of folding at year's end this season.. how many more 200-250 people crowds can they have before going under for good? 
Milwaukee Wave - Quality team at every spectrum. Hopefully they have moved on completely (for the better) from the Sue Black era.
Missouri Comets - Can't find a single thing bad about this team. Top end quality and arguably the best run indoor soccer team in the world currently.
Ontario Fury - Bernie has done AMAZING with this team. Really coming into it's own, attendance and performance are both solid.
Sacramento Surge - Horrible team, horrible attendance. Why is this team even allowed into semi-pro league is questionable, let alone a "professional" league. (Must be nice to be close to San Diego)
Rancho Seco  Saltillo - Trash both in the stands and on the field.
San Diego Sockers - Solid run team, solid fan support and performance. 
Soles De Sonora - Great 1st year, attendance and performance are top notch.. BUT, its a Mexican team. We've all seen Mexican teams in the past perform great at the box office and on the field and the vanish. 
Syracuse Silverknights - Do they stay? Do they go? Do they really survive with no Eastern division? They nearly folded last year and finances are going to get worse if they stay.
Tacoma Stars - My favorite MASL team (outside of the Blast when they were playing in it). Run beautifully, fan support is growing and growing. I believe this is the model franchise for the MASL to copy. 
Turlock Express - Trash both in the stands and on the field.
Detroit Waza Flo - I love Dom, he's a great guy and he makes an effort with what financially he has. But let's get real for a second, they don't win much, they play in front of 200-700 people, and travel isn't exactly going to be great no matter how it breaks down. This team is also the #1 culprit of fielding entirely different rosters on the road as opposed to home.
So there is your league MASL fans... where is the greatness of this league? Soles seems special, but again, Mexican teams always do until they fold randomly. San Diego is special and great, but attendance dropped last year, and it's only in business because of rec center teams with little to no talent strategically located near them for cheap travel and easy W's. Ontario and Tacoma look awesome and seem to be growing on every front, but it's year 2 (1/2) for Tacoma, and Ontario spiked 25% in a single season, is it sustainable is the question. Milwaukee has a rumored demise every year but with attendance rising last year I think they'll be fine, same with Missouri despite them dropping in attendance.
7 to 8 teams with a legit chance to win, the rest is simply there for substance (and easy travel for others). But if winning and losing doesn't matter to you, how about the fact only 1 team averaged over 5K people per game last year in the MASL... Sonora. And only 5 teams average over 3K per game (SD, Miss, Mil, Sonora, and Ontario by 84 people per game/3,084). Meanwhile, they have 7 teams who average UNDER 1,000 people per game ANNOUNCED crowd. Everyone knows figures usually get padded or inflated, even if just a tad, and they still didn't crack 1k per. The 6 other teams range from 2,082 to 2,772 and include 1 team with 0 (expansion El Paso).
The Ambush and Blast both averaged over 5K last season, with the Ambush putting up 5,302 per game, while the Blast led the league with 6,103 per game.
Adding up the 3 IPL team's total figures comes to 134,337 people who watched St. Louis, Harrisburg, and Baltimore play combined. A figure that eclipses Brownsville, Saltillo, Turlock, Sacramento, Baja, Las Vegas, Detroit, Dallas, Tacoma, Chicago, and Cedar Rapids combined (129,175 for all of those teams). 11 teams to 3.
The MASL has the numbers when it comes to teams, but based on the numbers above and realistic outlook of the league, I believe it's pretty easy to see neither league is extremely competitive on the field, but IPL will grossly outsell the MASL at the box office.