&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Tom Edwards - Blimey! Never easy, is it?! &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23COYS" target="_blank"&gt;#COYS&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
90+6 min Throw-in to United on the right. It's thrown long into the box and flicked across goal, but no one is there to knock it in.
90+5 min Still playing...
90+3 min Late drama here! A long ball over the top from Murphy and Basham sprints past a sleepy defence. Vorm comes out and gathers and Basham, who probably wasn't going to get there, slides in overly enthusiastically and catches the keeper with his studs. That probably hurt, but it's just a yellow card.
90+1 min There will be four minutes of additional time for Sheffield United to grab a goal. Broadway Danny Rose is on for Mason. Murphy runs up into the box but Vertonghen makes the tackle and wins a goal-kick.
GOAL! Sheff Utd 2-2 Spurs (Eriksen 88) Eriksen digs Spurs out of a hole again. He peels off the back of the defence, runs diagonally, right-to-left across the face of goal and then slides it left-footed back inside the far post. Nicely taken but heartbreak for the Blades.
87 min Harris clips a nice ball over the top to send Adams away down the left of the area. He goes hip-to-hip with Walker and goes to ground, but no penalty. But...
86 min Davies gets forward now for Spurs and crosses into the box, but Mason can't control it and Howard gathers. Enthralling match now, this.
84 min Ooh! Flynn runs forward from right back and spots a massive gap in the defence. He slides the ball through for Reed down the inside right channel. The 17-year-old bursts between the defence and has the goal at his mercy, but shoots narrowly ove.r
83 min Anyone remember Richard Stanton's email on 70 minutes? It's still there for posterity.
82 min The heat is really on Spurs now. Scougall has a go from the edge of the area but scuffs it. As it stands we're going to extra time, after which away goals become a factor. What a change from Nigel Clough though bringing Adams on.
GOAL! Sheff Utd 2-1 Spurs (Adams 79) I don't believe it! Che Adams has two in two minutes. This time it was Murphy who got to the byline on the right. He pulled it back and Adams' shot from 12 yards takes a deflection of Dier and goes past Vorm!
GOAL! Sheff Utd 1-1 Spurs (Adams 77) Or maybe it's not quite over. A low ball across the face of goal from the right and it misses everyone in the middle but Adams taps in at the far... OH HOLD ON
75 min Mason cuts inside of McEveley, but the United man just about does enough to stop him from bursting into the box. Here's Steven Baekeland...
As a Gooner, this is a terrible thing to think about, but if I must, the lesser of two evils (and I can't believe I'm saying it) is the Hotspur.
73 min In Spain, Arda Turan of Atletico Madrid has been booked for throwing a boot at the linesman. Lamela goes off, Townsend on for Spurs. Sheffield Utd go for a double change with Higdon and Adams replacing McNulty and Campbell-Ryce respectively.
72 min Nice work from Murphy on the left as he teases the opening for a cross, which finds McNulty in the box. Jimmy uses his hand though. "The f--- did I do?" he doesn't say but I wish he did.
70 min Sorry Spurs fans, I'm not going to give you Richard Stanton's email address, even though he'd deserve it for this...
Hi Dan.
Am following your commentary on the train on my way to work in sunny Sydney. As a Spurs fan I'd just like to say nothing can possibly go wrong now. Keep up the good work.
68 min Reed plays it in from the left for McNulty but Paulinho reads it well and puts Lamela away on the counter. The Argentinian sprints clear and slides a lovely little ball into the box for Mason, but Baxter gets back well to make a last-ditch challenge.
67 min Lamela is tripped just to the left, 30 yards out. Kane will have a go this time and hits it David Luiz style, over the wall but too close to Howards. Easy for the goalie.
66 min Changes for both sides. 17-year-old Reed, who is younger than OK Computer, is on for the captain Doyle. Spurs replace Dembele, who had a knock, with Paulinho.
65 min Great turn by Scougall in midfield and he leaves Mason for dead. Up to the box he runs and left he gives it to McNulty, who can cross. Or rather he can't, if that whack into the stands is anything to go by.
64 min Ben Davies makes an inside-to-out run off the ball and is tripped by Flynn 20 yards out. Flynn lucky not to get a second yellow there. Eriksen steps up, just to the left this time, and curls it low into the wall.
62 min Baxter picks it up 30 yards out. He takes a couple of steps forward and looks to fire a rocket into the top corner. He scuffs it wide though. Sheffield United fans: is Baxter a bit rubbish? He's been a bit rubbish tonight.
60 min Nice work from Dembele, dancing down the right past two challenges and into the box before running out of options. He knocks it back and Spurs pass it around, looking for an opening. In the end though they just give it back to Dembele and he whacks it miles over.
59 min Sheffield United's Flynn gets booked for a trip on Dembele. Here's a salient point in response to our half-time Tweet claiming Spurs were cruising.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: David Bullock - &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/TeleFootball" target="_blank"&gt;@TeleFootball&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/DanLucas86" target="_blank"&gt;@DanLucas86&lt;/a&gt; when have Spurs every cruised to anything ?? Long way to go and goals change games ! &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23cos" target="_blank"&gt;#cos&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
57 min This is a really good spell now for the home side. Campbell-SoupRice has it in space on the right and looks to whip in a low cross, but Vertonghen reads it well.
56 min Good position for the free-kick this, just to the left of the Spurs box. Murphy rolls it back to Baxter, who shoots first time from 20 yards straight into the boot of a defender.
54 min Mix-up between Vertonghen and Walker and the ball is out for a Sheff Utd throw in a good position. McNulty treats Vertonghen as he might Bill Rawls and gets on the wrong side of him. He wins a corner. Nowt comes from that but then Murphy skins Dembele wide on the left and the Belgian is booked for a trip.
53 min Murphy Andros Townsends it, cutting inside and shooting on his right from 30 yards. Everyone looks a little surprised he has the audacity. It's well wide anyway. Down the other end, Kane has a crack from the edge of the box but again hits it straight at Mark Howard.
52 min Lamela gets in behind the defence and McEveley makes the challenge inside the box. Oddly, a goal-kick rather than a corner is given.
49 min Dier fouls McNulty on the left touchline and the free-kick is whipped in from deep. It comes off the head of Walker and goes across the box, then out for a throw. Moments later Walker looks to run it out of defence and loses possession, but Stambouli reads it perfectly and sweeps up the danger. He's put in an excellent, calm showing today, has Stambouli.
48 min Sheffield United launch it long from halfway, into the box and a terrible header from Vertonghen doesn't get the ball clear. McNulty has his back to goal and hooks it back over his shoulder and wide.
47 min Mason goes in late on Scougall and gets booked.
46 min Back underway we go. No changes at the break. Let's hope Sheffield United can at least put up a fight because this crowd deserves it. Bad sign to start as they lose the ball and Dembele goes on a powerful run, driving through the middle of the park. He knocks it left to Kane in the area; Kane checks inside then shoots into the side netting.
20.45 Our first email of the night and Marc Melander has strong words...
I seriously hope Spurs turn the Chelsea cheats over at Wembley.
In other news Torres has scored a blinding goal v. Barca. A strike of great beauty. Mascherano had to pay to get back in the ground.
Atletico lead that one 2-1, 2-2 on aggregate.
20.43 This really was as good a free-kick as you'll see this year...
Half-time: That's that for the half and the Blades will be glad to get back into the dressing room. Between the battering they're getting at the hands of Mason and Eriksen, and that wearther, I'm not sure I'd want to come back out if I was them.
45+1 min Cracked into the wall. Oh well. It's not cleared though and Spurs' relentless attacks continue. Kane shoots into the hands of the keeper from the edge of the area.
45 min Ryan Mason steps on the gas when he picks the ball up 25 yards out and runs towards the goal. He goes past about three challenges before a fourth trips him on the edge of the box, just to the right. Eriksen again...
42 min I fear this is going to turn into a bit of a procession now. Spurs seem to be in no danger at all; Sheffield United do look like a League One side. Scougall is allowed space to dribble down the right-hand touchline and he plays an early diagonal pass to McNulty. The Baltimore cop, flicks it up with his right foot and stylishly volleys at goal, but it's a weak, wide shot.
39 min Far too easy for Dembele to dribble down the right, tightly marked by two men and then step between them. He passes left and Mason hits it first time from 20 yards. It's a mishit though and wide.
37 min The snow is getting heavier. Jamie Murphy comes forward through it and Walker clips his heels. The England man goes into the book for it.
34 min Some reaction to that free-kick courtesy of our proper journalists.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Matt Law - Pretty sure I've said before that i think Eriksen is the best free-kick taker playing in England. That was one of his best&lt;/noframe&gt;
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Henry Winter - Fabulous free-kick from Eriksen. Brilliant strike, accurate, powerful, unstoppable. 1-0 to &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23thfc" target="_blank"&gt;#thfc&lt;/a&gt;. Away fans singing about Wembley.&lt;/noframe&gt;
33 min Kane again gets in behind the defence down the inside left. Again McEveley goes back but this time Kane checks back inside to put McEveley on his backside. Still, the angle is too tight and he shoots straight at Howard.
32 min Free-kick to Sheffield United wide on the right, quite deep. It's knocked short and Flynn dribbles towards goal, but his cross is headed out by Stambouli.
31 min We can probably go home now. Sheffield United need to score three.
OOH WHAT A GOAL! Sheff Utd 0-1 Spurs (Eriksen 29) A burst of pace from Stambouli and he's taken down 25 yards out, wide-ish on the right. Up steps Eriksen and he curls it sublimely over the wall, across the face of the keeper and perfectly into the top, far corner.
27 min This is good defending from McEveley. Dembele slips it down the left-hand channel and Kane is clear. McEveley goes back with him and forces Kane wide, and the latter's shot is into the side netting.
25 min I like Michael Vorm, but I can't think for the life of me how he's better off at Spurs than Swansea. Apart from financially, obviously. Anyhow, he's had a pretty shoddy five days as this drop shows.
22 min McNulty is dispossessed on the edge of the area. He thinks it's a foul but no dice. Lamela comes haring clear and Spurs have a great chance to counter as Kane is in support, but Lamela dithers and gets tackled. Mason picks the ball up and shoots from 40 yards. Oddly, it doesn't go in.
21 min Murphy does better going forward and tricks his way past Walker down the right. Again his low cross is nowhere near McNulty and Eriksen clears.
20 min Kane gets away from McEveley, but goes too early and is off-side.
19 min Now Baxter gives the ball away, caught in possession on halfway. Eriksen passes to Kane and the striker goes wide to the right of the box. With the goalie Howard expecting a cross, Kane shoots from an awkward angle but it's well wide. The return pass was the right option there.
18 min This is poor defending. Walker is found in space on the right, near the corner flag, and easily steps past Jamie Murphy who jumps out the way. Walker's cross is headed out to Dembele on the edge of the area and his low shot goes wide.
16 min It's been quite a low-quality game so far, with both sides making a lot of mistakes in possession and giving it away. It doesn't mean it isn't entertaining, just that it won't be for long.
14 min Here's a very specific prediction.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Michael S-J - &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/DanLucas86" target="_blank"&gt;@DanLucas86&lt;/a&gt; I think Harry Kane will score from outside the box again tonight. A driving shot through the rain.&lt;/noframe&gt;
It's light snow though, not rain. Unless you're predicting the weather?
13 min End-to-end stuff this. Murphy is played in down the left flank now for Sheffield United, but his low cross from the left flashes across McNulty. Down the other end we go and Kane gets a low shot in from the edge of the area, but straight at Howard.
11 min Eriksen runs at the defence and plays it down the left of the box for Kane, but he dallies and is robbed of the ball.
10 min Oh how has this stayed out? Campbell-Rice uses his pace to get in behind Davies. He crosses and Vorm catches, then spills it under pressure. United look certain to score when it's passed to McNulty but his low shot is straight at Walker on the line! That was very shoddy goalkeeping from the man who was at fault for Leicester's winner on Saturday.
9 min Nowt comes from it and Mason has to track back and tackle Campbell-Rice well to prevent the pacy winger from launching a counter-attack.
8 min Kane drops deeper and, 25 yards out, knocks a lovely ball into Dembele on the edge of the box. He's squeezed out and Spurs get a corner.
7 min Good work by Walker down the right to create space and the ball is passed back to him on the right-hand corner of the United box. He knocks it inside but straight to the tight Sheffield United defence.
5 min Murphy looks to play his striker in down the left-channel but, like Stringer Bell, the ball is tantalisingly out of reach for McNulty.
4 min The corner is worked to Lamela, who curls a shot miles high and miles wide from the edge of the area. Moments later McNulty attacks down the left but can't find Campbell-Rice on the right of the box with his cross.
3 min First chance for Kane. He chases what looks to be a lost cause down the right and shirks McEveley off the ball on the Spurs right-hand touchline. He squares it looking for Eriksen, but it's knocked behind for a corner.
2 min Spurs knock it around a bit. I don't think Sheffield United have had the ball yet, but nothing much has happened.
PEEP! Here we go then. Spurs get us underway. Their kit is, like the apple of Coldplay's eye, yellow.
19.42 Actually looking at the TV pictures, I think that must be the number of Spurs fans in the ground: The 32,000-plus capacity Bramall Lane is packed to the rafters and is positively rocking. Good stuff.
19.39 This low attendance is too unsurprising to be disappointing, isn't it?
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Tottenham Hotspur - The atmosphere is building inside Bramall Lane with 5,500 &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23THFC" target="_blank"&gt;#THFC&lt;/a&gt; fans in the ground. &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23COYS" target="_blank"&gt;#COYS&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
19.34 Ten minutes until kick-off. Any predictions, folks?
19.23 In the words of that song made famous by the movie Die Hard, the weather outside is frightful.
18.58 Evening folks. Are you sat comfortably? Ready for some hot and steamy Capital One Cup action as it happens from the glamorous Bramall Lane? Yeah, you are. You love it.
I don't know about you, but if they really wanted to add even the fainetest sheen of glamour to this one then they'd find a sexier-sounding sponsor. The Agent Provocateur Cup or something. "Do you want to go and see that game that's got something to do with lingerie tonight?" versus "Do you want to go and see that competition sponsored by [googles] credit cards? And not even Mastercard or Amex, but a small credit card?"
I mean, "Do you take Capital One?" asked no one, ever. It's a name that actually manages to be out-sexed by the Johnstone's Paint Trophy for crying out loud, and that's only a trophy.
All of which is slightly unfair, especially on tonight's game. Here we have two teams who for one thing are taking this competition seriously. Sheffield United are on their 842nd cup run in two seasons and, as a Blades-supporting friend of mine said a few weeks back, genuinely look more likely to win this than ever get out of League One. They also have a hell of an exciting player in Jamal Campbell-Ryce, the... wait, what? He's 31?! I genuinely thought he was about 10 years younger than that. Still, he's got wonderful pace and gave Ben Davies a torrid time in the first leg. They also have a striker called McNulty, allowing me to make a tonne of references to The Wire. Which I will be doing.
On the other hand you have Spurs. They are starting to look like a really good outfit, only one too prone to brainfarts to actually challenge for the league title Champions League places. They may have been embarrassingly dumped out of one cup at the weekend, but they look good enough to win one of the other two they're in. Mauricio Pochettino's team is a combination of first-teamers and the rest, which seems just about right for a cup semi-final second leg against a weaker opponent.
Don't expect Spurs to tear up any teams, but then don't expect Sheffield United to either. I'm going for a 2-0 Spurs win on the night.
18.47: The teams are in:
Sheffield United: Howard, Harris, Basham, Flynn, Doyle, Murphy, Scougall, Baxter, McNulty, McEveley, Campbell-Ryce.  Subs: Alcock, Higdon, Reed, Turner, Kennedy, Adams, Wallace.
Tottenham: Vorm, Walker, Dier, Vertonghen, Davies; Mason, Stambouli: Lamela, Dembele, Eriksen; Kane  Subs: Friedel, Fazio, Rose, Paulinho, Townsend, Adebayor, Soldado
Preview: Dan will be in at around 18.45 to bring you all the pre-match build up, and then the game itself.
In the meantime read our preview and the related articles above.
Spurs come into this match with a 1-0 first-leg lead, but know they'll be in for a tough evening against Nigel Clough's well-organised team, who have already knocked out Southampton this season.
The winners of this semi-final will of course take on Chelsea in the final, after Jose Mourinho's team beat Liverpool at Stamford Bridge last night.
Mauricio Pochettino's side were knocked out of the FA Cup by Leicester, and will be desperate to avoid a second cup exit in five days.
Blades manager Clough had this to say about the match: "I read some quotes from Bradford players saying the Friday night game, where Cambridge drew 0-0 at home against Manchester United, gave them inspiration and belief.
"We are going to try to use the weekend in the same sort of way.
"But the other side of it is that it will have put Spurs on high alert - if the first leg didn't already - that if you are not careful, lower-league teams can cause you a problem.
"I think they may be a bit more relaxed at Bramall Lane, because they have a one-goal lead and the onus is very much on us now to go and create.
"It will be an unbelievable achievement for the club, as a League One club, to get to the final."