FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASEMonday, March 4, 2013
ALLEN, Texas—The Tarleton Alumni Association and Tarleton Athletics Department invite former students and friends of the university to join them in a reception celebrating the Texans and TexAnns playing in the 2013 Lone Star Conference (LSC) Basketball Championships.
The reception will be held Friday, March 8, from 5-6:30 p.m. at Dodie’s Restaurant, located just across the street from the Allen Event Center where the Texans and TexAnns will both play this week. Dodie’s Restaurant physical address is 190 E. Stacy Rd., Suite 1320, Allen, TX 75002.
Hor d’oeuvres will be served and a cash bar will be available. Door prizes will also be given away to those in attendance.
All Tarleton fans attending the LSC tournament this week are encouraged to attend in support of the Texans and TexAnns.
About the TournamentThe men’s and women’s brackets for the LSC Championship, March 6-9 in Allen, was decided Saturday night as the league’s basketball teams finished up the regular season. The top eight teams have advanced to the LSC Championship Tournament, and the postseason begins with first-round games on Wednesday, March 6.
The Texans earned the No. 3 seed in the upcoming tournament and will face No. 6 seeded Eastern New Mexico. The Greyhounds finished in a four-way tie for fourth-place in the LSC and earned the No. 6 seed after tie-breakers. The Texans and Greyhounds will tip-off at 2:30 p.m., Thursday, March 7 in first round action inside the Allen Event Center.
The TexAnns earned the No. 4 seed in the tourney and will play at 6 p.m., Thursday with a rematch of last year’s championship game against Incarnate Word.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster outlets and Ticketmaster.com, as well as the Allen Event Center box office. Single-session tickets are $15 for adults and $10 for students. Premium seating options are available as well, with more details available at: www.lonestarconference.org/allen.
All the championship games will be web streamed live on FoxSportsSouthwest.com.  The webcasts are available free of charge.  Each webcast includes both video and audio, with viewers needing only a computer with a high-speed DSL or cable modem connection to the internet.
The LSC Men’s Basketball Tournament Champion earns automatic qualification to the 2013 NCAA Division II Men’s Basketball South Central Regional to be held March 16, 17, and 19 at a site to be determined. The winner of the South Central Region will advance to the Elite Eight, which is set for Freedom Hall in Louisville, Ky., on March 28 and 30.
The winners of the semifinal games advance to the title game which will be played at Phillips Arena in Atlanta, Ga. on April 7.  The NCAA is celebrating the 75th Division I Men’s Basketball Championship in 2013. As part of the celebration, all three men’s basketball championships (Divisions I, II and III) will be played in the same city and weekend.
For more information please contact Assistant Athletic Director Casey Hogan at hogan@tarleton.edu or call 817-964-5528. Details about the Lone Star Conference championships can found at www.lonestarconference.org.
Tarleton State UniversityA member of The Texas A&M University System