When the Professional Arena Soccer League kicks off its sixth season tonight with the Illinois Piasa hosting the Tulsa Revolution it will be the beginning of what the league hopes will be a watershed season for the league.
The PASL heads into the season with an all-time high of 20 teams split over three divisions.  17 American teams will join three Mexican teams will compete in the Eastern, Central, and Pacific Divisions in the hunt for the Ron Newman Cup.
The offseason was filled with news of expansion and high profile player and coaching acquisitions.  The final tally shows seven expansion teams and three teams were sold.  As a result of all the changes, the league should find itself in the best overall health, and with the most competitive parity, in its history.
Most of the PASL's games this season will once again be webcast via pay-per-view on AmericaOne Sports at http://www.americaonesports.com/upcoming_events.asp?q=l&value=pasl
Here is a team by team overview of the 2013/14 season.
EASTERN DIVISION (2012/13 record in parenthesis)
Chicago Mustangs (11-5): The Mustangs just missed the playoffs last year while playing in the tough Central Division.  Leading scorer Nestor Hernandez was traded to Dallas, but the Mustangs bring back a strong core including Miguel Vaca, Omar Santillan, and goalkeeper Jesus Flores as well as young break out stars Bryan Velazquez and Luis "Pee Wee" Ortega.  The Mustangs signed Efrain "Wilo" Martinez and former Honduran National Team defender Yermy Hernandez.  Chicago will play three of their games at The Odeum this year because of high ticket demand at the smaller Grand Sports Arena.
Cincinnati Saints (7-0-1 in PASL-Premier; Cincinnati Kings 11-5):  The Saints bought the Cincinnati market rights and moved their organization up to the PASL after spending the last four seasons in the PASL-Premier.  The Saints now have the best of both worlds matching their best players with longtime PASL veterans such as Sam Fiore, Jeff Henderson, Eddie Hertsenberg, and Kwame Sarkodie.  Matt Breines heads into his first full season as Head Coach. 
Cleveland Freeze (expansion): The Freeze made some big noise when they signed indoor soccer's all-time leading scorer Hector Marinaro as their Head Coach. Marinaro and the new ownership will bring stability to the region and should be a lot more competitive than the Ohio Vortex had been.  Allen Eller, John Ball, Steve Gillespie, and Stefan Ostergren headline the roster.
Detroit Waza Flo (14-2):  The Waza Flo won the US Open Championship last year, but fell short against San Diego for the second straight year in the Newman Cup Final.  Detroit enters their sixth year in the league with unfinished business.  The Waza warriors will play their first season at the Melvindale Civic Arena after they sold it out last year for the US Open championship game.
Harrisburg Heat (6-10): The Heat head into the season knowing that Head Coach Richard Chinapoo will be retiring at the end of the season.  Last year's young team returns largely intact led by Tyler Witmer, Tom Mellor, and big-bodied late season acquisition Val Teixeira.
Illinois Piasa (4-12): The Piasa were a tough team at home but struggled on the road last year, and new Head Coach Doug Montroy went big and went Bosnian in the offseason.  The Piasa have 11 players who are at least six foot and a seven players from Bosnia. They are once again led by Roger Gemoules, Greg Crook, and goalkeeper Alan Hagerty.
Dallas Sidekicks (13-3): The Sidekicks ran out of gas in their first season despite winning the Central Division and ending San Diego's 48-game winning streak.  Dallas brings almost everyone back except RJ Luevano who is taking time off to deal with his son's recovery.  Building on last season, the Sidekicks added 38 and 24 goals in Nestor Hernandez (from Chicago) and Bronil Koochoie (Turlock), respectively.
Hidalgo La Fiera (12-4 as RGV Flash): The RGV Flash were sold and renamed in the offseason and much of Mariano Bollella's squad is back.  The team, edged out by Detroit in the league semifinal last year, has added indoor superstar Carlos "Chile" Farias who seems plays his best under Bollella, and goalkeeper Jose Bontti is back.
Monterrey Flash (expansion):  The former RGV Flash owner has once again set up shop in Monterrey, where the Flash started as an LMFR team.  The Flash have made numerous headlines, first announcing Genoni Martinez as a player/coach and announcing Arena Monterrey as their venue.  The Flash then hired renowned administrator Jorge Urdiales, the longtime President of Rayados. Finally the team signed former Mexican National Team star Jesus "el Cabrito" Arellano, and former Chilean National Teamer Claudio "El Diablo" Nunez.
Saltillo Rancho Seco (expansion): Rancho Seco comes to the PASL from the LMFR.  Saltillo is located about an hour west of Monterrey.  Rancho Seco came in second place this spring in the LMFR and lost in the semifinals to eventual champion Guerreros Guadalajara.
Texas Strikers (3-13): There was a time last year when it looked like a sure thing that Texas would not win a game.  That they ended up winning three was a moral victory.  When they almost upset Rio Grande Valley before losing 11-10 in overtime, showed that the young team had potential.  Head Coach and GM Topper Cogan is back for a second season at the Ford
Tulsa Revolution (expansion): Like Monterrey and Saltillo, the Revolution are new to the PASL, but not a new team. A handful of players remain from when the Revolution played in the AISL in 2007/08.  Owner Adam Mellor has added partners and moved into the Cox Business Center.  The Revolution feature only three PASL veterans, Josh Danza, Levi Coleman, and 20-goal scorer Franck Tayou.
Wichita B-52s (expansion): Another new team with a history, the B-52s carry over seven players from the MISL's Wichita Wings, who ceased operations at the end of last season.  The rest of Wichita's roster is filled with mostly young, local, players whose development Head Coach Larry Inlow has likely been watching for some time.  Matt Clare and Kevin Ten Eyck have demonstrated some offensive capability in the MISL and could be leaned on early until the younger players gain their footing.  The PASL should get an attendance bump from Wichita who average 2,870 in the MISL last year.
Bay Area Rosal (4-2-2 PASL-Premier): The Rosal finished as runners up this August in the PASL-Premier Summer season and now will move up to the PASL for the first time.  Head Coach Mario Astorga will have his hands full in the Pacific Division.   Craig Scheer and Uriel Robledo have the most professional indoor experience on the roster and Zak Ibsen is a former US National Team player returning to indoor soccer for the first time since he played for the Baltimore Spirit in 1996.  Former Sacramento Knights Luis Orellana is trying to make a comeback at the age of 44.
Las Vegas Legends (13-3): The Legends could be the team that unseats San Diego in the Pacific Division as they nearly did in last year's playoffs.  Their top five scorers from last year are back including fancy-footed rookie sensation Ricardo Sobreira, and veteran playmaker Enrique Tovar, who had a career year last year, playing in the best shape of his life.  Jesus Molina is back, but the Legends will probably increase the workload of Zeke Sanchez.  Las Vegas snagged Turlock's leading scorer Ivan Campos to more than make up for the loss of Franck Tayou.
Mexico Toros (7-9): The Toros worked hard this offseason revamping their roster, but brought back top offensive contributors Jose Juan Caballero and Gerardo Guerrero.  Gerardo Villa returns after sitting out last season.  The bigger question with the Toros is always the defense and losing a preseason game in Ontario 16-8 didn't do anything to quiet those doubts.  The Toros will go with rookie American goalkeeper Obie Clibourne this season.
Ontario Fury (expansion): The Fury went heavy on the veteran talent for their first season.  Head Coach Bernie Lilavois' team has as much professional indoor experience as almost any team in the league. It starts with Sanaldo in net and extends to playmakers Tiguinho and Majell Aterado.  Israel Sesay and Tino Nunez have both played in MLS and the MISL.  The Fury put on a show this preseason doubling up Mexico 16-8 before 5,285 at Citizens Business Bank Arena.
Sacramento Surge (1-14): The Surge struggled in their first season but always gave Turlock a hard time. Now in a triangle with Turlock and Bay Area, the Surge will need to fend off their local rivals and try to play spoiler.  The addition of Hugo Bramila should help the offense and player/coach Jorge Fernandez has brought in several rookies.
San Diego Sockers (15-1):  The Sockers showed they were human last year, but just barely.  The Sidekicks ended their 48-game winning streak and Detroit took the US Open title off of them, but the Sockers still managed to win their fourth PASL league title in as many years.  John Krause, Dan Antoniuk, and Antonio Sutton were all limited in the number of games played last year and all three will not return this year.  Paul Wright retired after a marvelous career that spanned four decades.  The Sockers did not rest on their laurels. Evan McNeley returns to the PASL after five years in the MISL and Jeff Hughes planted his flag with the Sockers after spending last year with the Cincinnati Kings and Missouri Comets.  The addition of Hughes gives the Sockers all five PASL MVPs joining with Brian Farber and Kraig Chiles.
Turlock Express (9-7): Turlock is the PASL's smallest market and yet Head Coach Art Pulido continues to develop talented players.  Turlock has lost Ivan Campos, Bronil Koochoie, Uriel Robledo,  Armando Martinez  and goalkeeper Javier Pedroza this offseason and yet Pulido is confident the new players he has assembled will make the team more competitive than ever this season.   Adrian Gutierrez, Arturo Pulido, and Jesse Horta are among the top returning players.
About Professional Arena Soccer League and Premier Arena Soccer League
The PASL is a professional league which began play on October 25, 2008.  The league, which will begin its sixth season in November, is the largest and longest-running arena soccer organization in the US. The Tulsa Revolution, Ontario Fury, Wichita B-52s, Monterrey Flash, Saltillo Rancho Seco, Cleveland Freeze, and Bay Area Rosal have been added for the 2013/14 season. The PASL-Premier is enjoying its 16th season as the nation's top amateur arena soccer league and is the official developmental league of the PASL. Both the PASL and PASL-Premier are members of Confederacion Panamerica de Minifutbol (CPM).