Hillsborough. Formerly just another name of a big ground in the north of England.  Now forever indelibly linked by association to one of the biggest ever sporting tragedies in the UK. For that reason alone there was a cloud over the potential for a great day out, even though it was our first away day of the season, and one of the gems of being promoted last season was the chance to travel to bigger and better grounds to support our team. Some younger fans may not bat an eye-lid at the significance of that fateful day in April 1989, but football changed forever that day and every time I visit Hillsborough I am mindful of what happened, and my thoughts on it and the blame game that still gets played out to this day.
Here is not the place to open a debate on what happened that day however, and as life goes on we had to get our head around the match ahead and the fact that this season we still as yet hadn’t really adjusted to life at the higher level. On the flip side to that coin, If we were to try hard and play well, then I wouldn’t moan about the result either way and historically Hillsborough had been a happy hunting ground for me following Preston.
Nonetheless, we arose from our slumbers and breakfasted before donning our jackets and scarves to jump in the car and start the journey up to the steel city from our home in Kent.  The journey was fairly uneventful and trouble free as we ploughed a steady furrow up the A1 till we deviated in a westerly direction along the A57 and over the M1 and onwards into the southern satellite suburbs of the greater Sheffield.
For me, it’s a poignant drive; that section on the A57 used to pass through a heartland of coal mines and slag heaps, now all gone, and then closer to Sheffield one or 2 former landmark heavy industry plants are no more, just like the Tinsley railway yard and depot just out of sight from the A57.  The Tinsley marshalling yard was one of the biggest in the UK, and its attached depot even in the 80s had the second biggest allocation of diesel locomotives in the UK , second only to Toton in Nottinghamshire.  Nothing remains of it now, save for a few sparsely used sidings. For Susan, my partner it was equally poignant as it was her first ever visit to the steel city and was soaking it all up. There were also some magnificent (and quite worrying) cloud formations clearly banking up on the Pennine as we descended towards Sheffield. The reward for being the early riser was not only a smooth trouble free drive, but also the pick of some free on-street parking near the ground almost immediately after we’d coasted past the façade of the Main Stand which I’d never knowingly seen before and found suitably impressive.
We meandered down to the away end, the sadly notorious Leppings Lane end, where the façade is, errr, sadly not quite as impressive as the Main Stand. In truth, it really is looking quite tired, tatty, and in desperate need of some TLC.  We opted to enter the turnstiles fairly promptly to get an optimum choice of seating which for us was unreserved ; the stewards merely asked that we stayed within the centre blocks.  I opted to try the meat and potato pie which was so scrumptious I simply had to go and purchase another one!! It's worth noting at this point that the meshing at the food counter has either been removed permanently or is only erected for certain fixtures.  In the area we were seated, the stewarding was friendly and low key and I happily engaged in friendly banter with some of them on the favourite topic of pie eating!
Hillsborough, despite that gloom of 1989 attached to it, is a great ground once inside. Looking to our left was the North Stand, an edifice of some notable history being one of the early cantilever structures built at UK football grounds and it belies its age as its in great looking condition. Along its roof are a set of low rectangular frames upon which half of the grounds floodlights are mounted. Directly opposite us sat the Kop End, a two-tiered stand affair. Interestingly it has an odd looking walkway heading in a southerly direction at an odd angle up and across the second tier.  A work colleague of mine suggests that this would follow the line of the old terrace banking before the rebuild of the stand into an all-seater ground as he recalled the away terrace rising in height towards the city or south side.  It is an impressive looking and distinctive stand. To the right of us as we looked at the pitch sat the Main Stand which, like the Cantilever stand opposite it belies its age. It was substantially rebuilt in the 1990's with an extra tier and yet charmingly retains its old fashioned Leitch gable that has been incorporated into the design of the new roof over the structure.
The overall impression, in stark contrast to the first impressions of the exterior of the Leppings Lane End, is of a fine stadium that has retained individual character despite becoming an all-seater ground, with an immenseness about it to have you believe that it could actually hold more than the notional 40,000 or so capacity it currently has.
The Kop End especially has an aura of vastness about it, and as the crowd grew in the build up to kick-off, the other clue to the grounds heritage was given away in the absolute flood of last minute entrants to the home stands; men who for years know to the minute how long it will take them to walk from the chippy or favourite pub in time to take their pew just before kick-off and not miss a minute of the match. Such tradition is so sadly swept away when clubs relocate from much loved former homes. There is a corner of seating in the open air between the Leppings Lane End and the North Cantilever stand, which I’m led to believe is used if small numbers of away fans are visiting and the larger Leppings Lane end kept closed……….all I can say to that is bring your umbrella if it rains!
The match got underway with the home side asking most of the questions during the first 45 minutes whilst Preston seemed to concentrate on a dogged defensive display. Indeed, with the way the team seemed structured, we could have played till midnight and not threatened the Wednesday goal, yet we looked secure at the back and there was no shortage of industry and huff-and-puff in the midfield.  Just when it looked that we’d get to half-time at 0-0, a suicidal piece of defending from Chris Humphrey playing the ball needlessly across his own goal area from a relatively secure position gave the Wednesday a brilliant platform to attack and Kieran Lee gleefully smashed in a certain gimme.  It would have been harder to miss.
I consoled myself at half-time with another pie.....
Early in the second half, just as it looked like we were about to change things up front, a second suicidal move with a Preston defender bizarrely trying to save a corner gave another gilt edged chance that the Owls happily took, and I sensed the game had gone from our grasp.  Fortunately I was wrong.  Our manager,  Simon Grayson opted to bring on Jordan Hugill and Eoin Doyle to replace the front two, one of whom was a former Wednesday man Steve May, and the change was quite invigorating.  We started to impose ourselves on the game somewhat and after several good chances were created , Alan Browne converted one to really light up the match as a contest.  This did seem to stir up a confrontation between some of the stewards and a section of our supporters, but as it was quite some distance from where we were, I have no idea as to what was the cause.
For several periods we really had Wednesday rocking at the back, and there was at least one lucky goal line clearance that kept the home side with their noses in front.   Still, as the seconds ticked down, we never gave up, and as a last corner was won, even our keeper Jordan Pickford raced up to join the push to try and get a point out of the match.  Sadly, it wasn’t to be, as Wednesday managed to defend the corner, and Lewis McGugan looked up and cheekily chipped the desperate Pickford still running back as fast as he could but in vain and the home fans erupted as well they might. They’d been on the ropes hanging on to their slender lead and suddenly the 3 points were effectively in the bag for them.
Some of our fans weren’t best pleased with Pickford; but as I observed to my partner, I’d rather we lost the game 3-1 trying to get something out of it than just tamely playing the game out to limit the damage. We had done everything we could to try and nick something, and sadly this time it just didn’t quite work out for us. I had no complaints.
As we exited the ground, it was disappointing to note several quite serious flashpoints erupt between home and away fans, something I’ve never seen on previous visits to Hillsborough and it was clearly more than just handbags at 10 paces. We jumped in our car, and as it was facing in a Westerly direction and away from the ground and the congestion, I simply drove off in that direction without giving it much thought to start with.  After a few miles of steadily gaining a little height, it dawned on me that I could strike the A628 and treat my partner Susan to a drive over Woodhead, something that she’d also never seen before and as the weather was clear and there was plenty of daylight it was what we ended up doing.  Not only is at very scenic drive, it’s also a poignant one for railway afficionados as the lamented and closed Woodhead route still leaves plenty of evidence of its existence even to this day following its corporate vandalism style closure in the early 1980's. As we had no time pressures, it was a very good choice as the late afternoon sunlight on the moors provided some quite atmospheric scenery to enjoy before we descended towards the M60 and then onwards towards home reflecting on the days match.
We agreed that the lads had played with industry and endeavour in the first half without being ambitious up front and were unlucky really to shoot ourselves in the foot just before half-time, and that after the second goal we’d given it a really good go. On another day, we might have nicked something, but as we stalwarts know, that’s football for you, you don’t always get your just desserts and you’ve just got to grin and move on to the next match.
As I’ve said before, I don’t mind us not winning if we’ve at least tried hard, and today was just such a day. I guess I was a little wistful though, as I’d secretly harboured hopes that we’d nick a win before the match as I’d only ever seen us win here before today’s match and I’d thought that maybe Stevie May would be the one to inflict some damage on our behalf upon his return to his former employers………but it was not to be.  I was satisfied that if we just kept our heads up going forward, our luck would turn and we’d start to get some results, as Sheffield Wednesday in no way outclassed us.
Most importantly of all, I’d won our internal pie eating competition 3-2
Plus Points for Hillsborough
1. A great aura inside the stadium that gives that “big ground” feeling
2. A ground that although modernised still has character and a uniqueness about it
3. Fantastic pies
4. Good public transport; although I didn’t use it on this occasion, Sheffield has a great tram system that connects Hillsborough with both the city centre, the main railway station, and the Meadowhall shopping complex
Minus points for Hillsborough
1. A very shabby exterior to the West stand (Leppings Lane End) lets a great ground down badly
2. The permanent tag of what happened in April ’89 attached to the aforementioned stand