England internationals Wayne Rooney, Michael Carrick and Ashley Young all missed their penalties as Championship underdogs Middlesbrough scored a sensational shoot-out win to knock Manchester United out of the Capital One Cup.
Thousands of Boro fans went berserk and their players mobbed hero goalkeeper Thomas Mejias as they won 3-1 on penalties after a goalless 120 minutes.
The Spaniard saved from Rooney and Young while Carrick lofted his attempt over the crossbar.
Well thanks for following, folks. I'll leave you with the scores from tonight in the fourth round as well as the quarter-final draw. Thanks for following and cheerio.
Middlesbrough vs EvertonSouthampton vs LiverpoolStoke City vs Sheffield WednesdayManchester City vs Hull City
Quarter-Final ties are to be played during the week commencing 30th November 2015.
If nothing else the fourth round has proved brutal in the eliminations of Chelsea, Arsenal and Manchester United - as Stoke City, Sheffield Wednesday and Middlesbrough advance at their expense.
It's effectively cost us a Chelsea vs Arsenal quarter-final but who doesn't love an upset?
Quarter-Final ties are to be played during the week commencing 30th November 2015.
1. Everton 2. Hull City 3. Sheffield Wednesday 4. Stoke City 5. Liverpool 6. Manchester City7. Middlesbrough 8. Southampton
'And so to penalties. United goalkeeper Sergio Romero has impressive previous, he saved from Ron Vlaar and Wesley Sneijder in the World Cup semi-final shoot-out for Argentina against Holland in 2014.'
3 – Manchester United have lost their last three penalty shootouts. Nerves.
What a chance for Fellaini! Lingard's ball into the box finds the Belgian unmarked but he can only nod over the bar!
Nearly a winner for United! The hosts are pressing heavily now and a far post cross is nodded back across the target where Martial's diving header is blocked clear. There will be one added minute in stoppage time.
OH, JUST WIDE! Andreas Pereira comes ever so close to snatching a winner as from the edge of the box he unleashes a powerful drive which fizzes just wide.
A second goalless draw of the week beckons at Old Trafford, only this one has to have a winner. With five minutes to play it looks like penalties will decide this.
Just over 10 minutes to go and United threaten a half-chance as Anthony Martial skips past the Boro defence before seeing a shot deflected behind.
Having had a sly old dig at proceedings it appears we may just wait for the game to end at Old Trafford anyway before the draw will be made. Common sense prevails maybe?
We look no closer to an opening goal at Manchester United as Middlesbrough continue to hold their own at the Premier League outfit.
The Capital One Cup draw for the quarter-finals will be on the way shortly, no I don't know why they can't wait for events to come to a conclusion at Old Trafford first. It's only a few minutes to wait...
This game has got me thinking. When was the last time Manchester United scored a domestic goal at Old Trafford?
The answer was Juan Mata in the final minute of their 3-0 victory over Sunderland which was over a month ago. If you like clean sheets, the Theatre of Dreams is the place to be these days.
This game remains an end-to-end contest. Marouane Fellaini and Andreas Pereira combine before the latter's cross towards the far post just evades the head of the Belgian.
Half-chance for Boro but as the ball falls for Leadbitter inside the box, his shot is blocked by a defender as United clear.
So we are underway again at Old Trafford, while this game goes on the draw for the quarter-finals of the Capital One Cup will be made. Have no fear though as I will bring it live to you.
Another Boro chance, but Stewart Downing's powerful low effort is straight at Romero who blocks clear as this game becomes stretched in stoppage time. Judging by the last 180 seconds , I'm more than happy to watch another 30 minutes!
There are three added minutes at Old Trafford as both teams have a chance to win it! At the far post, Jesse Lingard has a powerful effort well saved at the near post while at the other end Romeo is off his line to deny Boro.
Goals everywhere...except Old Trafford. There are just five minutes left as extra time beckons, and judging by this match, penalties too...
Manchester City have the final say of the goals though as Manu Garcia has come off the bench to restore the four-goal advantage following a counter attack.
There's a consolation for Crystal Palace as Damien Delaney thumps home a header from a Yannick Bolasie cross.
Scott Sinclair scores from the penalty spot, but there is barely going to be time to kick off again at St Mary's,
Jordan Ayew is brought down by Virgil van Dijk. Too little too late?
'The big guns Rooney and Martial are on now but Boro are still holding resolute. Rooney has just found half-a-yard of space in the penalty area but couldn't take advantage with a dodgy first touch.'
It may still be just a one-goal lead, but Liverpool have had Bournemouth at arm's length for much of this match.
Roberto Firmino has impressed and he is given a standing ovation by the home fans as he is replaced by Adam Lallana with four minutes left.
Sergio Romero, you lucky boy! The Manchester United keeper tries to control a Daley Blind pass-back only for the ball to roll under his foot and just wide of his goal. Middlesbrough are looking the more likely side to score the opening goal here!
The gloss is being added to the scoreline at the Etihad Stadium. Yaya Toure converts a penalty after Damien Delaney brought down Eliaquim Mangala.
Joining Manchester City in the quarter-finals are Southampton as Dusan Tadic floats a perfectly weighted cross into the box for Graziano Pelle to crash home a volley across goal with 13 minutes to play.
Still goalless at Old Trafford, but Middlesbrough are fuming they are not a goal ahead. Kike struck the post before a Man Utd defender in absolute comical fashion lashed home into his own goal, only for the effort to be ruled out for offside!
Nearly an opening goal for Manchester United and it's nearly gift wrapped to them by Mejias.
Memphis Depay hits a powerful low effort from 25 yards, but although it's straight at the Boro keeper, he fumbles before recovering to prevent the ball from spilling over the line. Pure Massimo Taibi (nearly).
Maybe there is still some fire in the Aston Villa belly! Jack Grealish and Jordan Ayew are on for Bacuna and Jordan Amavi and the visitors go close to equalising.
Alan Hutton's low cross runs for Gabriel Agbonlahor, whose top corner bound first time strike is tipped over by Stekelenburg.
Well that should just about rubber stamp Manchester City's quarter-final spot. De Bruyne's cut-back into the box is dummied by Bony, with the ball falling for Kelechi Iheanacho, who gets the ball out his feet before slamming home his first Etihad Stadium goal.
Palace will be sick of the sight of him as he also scored the winner in the league meeting between the teams last month.
Manchester United have made a change at the break. Louis van Gaal has given James Wilson the thumbs down as he is replaced by Wayne Rooney.
Bournemouth are still in this, but only thanks to Federici. Firmino picks up the ball on the edge of the box and his low drive across goal is tipped wide by the Bournemouth stopper.
The Capital One CUp injury curse has struck again. This time it's Pablo Zabaleta who is the victim as the Manchester City full-back is carried off on a stretcher. Bacary Sagna will replace him.
And Palace nearly go straight up the other end and make Bony pay for it! A free-kick into the box finds Mile Jedinak whose effort creeps past Caballero but not Martin Demichelis who hacks clear off the line.
Cliche alert. Next goal is crucial at the Etihad Stadium and Manchester City should have taken it to put the final nail in the coffin of this cup tie.
Fernando squares for the striker inside the box, but with a straight forward shot he spoons well over the bar.
Aston Villa had their moments in the first half, but it's a familiar tale for the visiting fans as their side fall behind.
By contrast it's a rare moment for Maya Yoshida as his well struck effort from 20 yards whistles into the bottom corner. Lovely strike.
Bournemouth are chasing an equaliser and they come close to grabbing one a Shaun MacDonald heads just wide across goal after jumping well to meet a cross.
Old Trafford seems to be the venue for clean sheets these days, as Manchester United toil against Championship opposition.
Marouane Fellaini tees up James Wilson, whose low effort is comfortably stopped by Tomas Mejias. In truth this hasn't been a great game.
But Palace nearly hit straight back! The ball falls for Joe Ledley inside the box but the midfielder with little time can only fire a snap shot over the bar.
Bony had missed a decent chance for Manchester City, but the 2014 winners are looking good for the quarter-finals now.
Kelechi Iheanacho advances into the box before playing a superb ball across goal for Kevin de Bruyne to slot home.
Still goalless at ST Mary's but Villa go close to opening the scoring. Bacuna plays a one-two with Ashley Westwood before his shot is tipped behind by Stekelenburg
Middlesbrough are making a point on the pitch, and their fans are making an even bigger one off it.
Thousands of fans are holding up camera phones with lights on as tribute to steelworkers who are losing their jobs in the North East.
Brilliant chance...for Middlesbrough! Grant Leadbitter chips the ball into the United box, before a failed overhead kick attempt is followed by a close range shot well saved by Sergio Romero.
'The atmosphere in Anfield has been poor for a number of weeks but tonight it has been even quieter than normal, very flat and eerie.
'It has made the screeching of Jurgen Klopp even easier to hear and he has just lambasted Divock Origi for not pressing his marker high up the field.
'During a break in play, he has just summoned the Belgium international to the bench for another debrief.'
'Manchester United aren't taking any chances tonight. The cost of their seven subs including Anthony Martial and Wayne Rooney adds up to more than £180million.'
Remember how last night saw the Capital One Cup claim an injury victim or three?
Well it looks like Liverpool have been struck by the same curse as Kolo Toure has pulled up with what looks like a hamstring injury.
As he limps off, the defender is applauded off as the Reds prepare to send on Martin Skrtel.
3 – Wilfried Bony has scored three goals in his last three starts (all comps) for Man City at the Etihad Stadium. Useful.
That goal comes just moments after Yannick Bolasie and Pablo Zabaleta had a nasty clash of heads, with the former coming off worse. Both though continue for now despite blood being spilled.
Bread and butter stuff for Wilfried Bony who heads home from a Aleksandar Kolarov corner.
'Paul Lambert said there was not enough 'realism' in relation to expectations at Aston Villa, his former club.
The travelling here don't seem to have terribly expectations, it must be said. They are repeatedly singing 'we are s***'.
So the kids are alright? You betcha! Divock Origi and Firmino combine before releasing Joao Teixeira inside the box.
The youngster performs a cheeky back-heel which beats Federici, but despite the effort being cleared off the line, Nathaniel Clyne rifles home the rebound for his first Liverpool goal
Ooooh that was close! Firmino collects a squared pass from 25 yards before taking a touch to get the ball out his feet and whistling a powerful drive just over the crossbar. Bournemouth keeper Adam Federici certainly looked troubled by that effort.
No goals still but we can't be too far away from one! Now Crystal Palace come close as Joe Ledley's shot is blocked into the path of Yannick Bolasie who from close range is denied by Willy Caballero.
How have rudderless Aston Villa started at Southampton? Not too bad as it happens. Kevin MacDonald is in his second caretaker spell at the club and his side have started well, Leandro Bacuna connecting with a Carlos Sanchez cross which is well saved by Maarten Stekelenburg.
What a chance for Bournemouth! The visitors hit Liverpool on the break, but as Junior Stanislas turns on to his right foot inside the box his low drive is well saved by the advancing Adam Bogdan.
Manchester City also make a promising start but after Kevin de Bruyne races past Scott Dann his shot across goal also creeps wide of the target
'Manchester traffic is not coping very well with both City and United playing. People are struggling to get to Old Trafford in time; radio co-commentator and former Middlesbrough and England defender Danny Mills has just arrived after spending two hours getting in from Harrogate (60miles) - on his motorbike! It is taking cars a lot longer.'
And inside 20 seconds, Liverpool already threaten as Roberto Firmino drags a low shot wide from 20 yards.
The teams are out at St Mary's! #saintsfc https://t.co/UECzOjBXxK
There's a fair few inside Anfield for Liverpool's clash with Bournemouth, as the teams on Merseyside as well as at the Etihad Stadium and St Mary's make their way out.
Kick-off for Manchester United vs Middlesbrough is at 8pm.
Manchester United: Romero, Darmian, Smalling, Blind, Rojo; Carrick, Fellaini, Pereira, Lingard, Wilson, Memphis.Subs: De Gea, Young, Schweinsteiger, Herrera, Mata, Martial, Rooney.
Middlesbrough: Mejias, Kalas, Ayala, Gibson, Friend, Leadbitter, Stephens, Nsue, Downing, De Pena, Kike.Subs: Dimi, Amorebieta, Clayton, Fabbrini, Jackson, Nugent, Zucolini.
'T.E.R.R.I.B.L.E.' That's what Jurgen Klopp wrote in block capitals in front of his newly inherited Liverpool squad during a team meeting with his charges.
Despite the Reds' slow start to the season, Klopp's assessment wasn't about them. It's how he wanted the opposition to feel after a match against the Anfield outfit.
According to the Liverpool Echo, the German told his players that he wanted them to impose fear and self-doubt among their rivals through a high-intensity style of play.
'We have to play the game and not the history. We have injured players but we have enough fit players. That's cool,' Klopp told Sky Sports.
'When we train between matches I saw the young guys, they are prepared for real football. We need Kolo [Toure] and Dejan [Lovren] and Joe Allen to help get rhythm.'
Southampton: Stekelenburg, Targett, Caulker, Van Dijk, Yoshida, Ward-Prowse, Wanyama, Ramirez, Juanmi, Romeu, Pelle.Subs: Kelvin Davis, Clasie, Fonte, Steven Davis, Tadic, Martina, Seager.
Aston Villa: Guzan, Hutton, Crespo, Clark, Richardson, Bacuna, Westwood, Sanchez, Amavi, Agbonlahor, Gestede.Subs: Okore, Sinclair, Veretout, Ayew, Gil, Bunn, Grealish.
Man City: Caballero, Zabaleta, Mangala, Demichelis, Kolarov, Jesus Navas, Fernando, Toure, De Bruyne, Bony, Iheanacho.Subs: Hart, Sagna, Kompany, Roberts, Otamendi, Barker, Garcia.
Crystal Palace: Hennessey, Mariappa, Delaney, Dann, Kelly, Ledley, Jedinak, Zaha, Mutch, Bolasie, Bamford.Subs: Ward, Hangeland, Campbell, McCarthy, Lee, Gayle, Sako.
Twenty minutes to go at the Etihad. Where are you following #cityvpalace from tonight? #mcfc pic.twitter.com/wy6CUnA4lX
Liverpool: Bogdan, Clyne, Toure, Lovren, Randall, Brannagan, Allen, Teixeira, Firmino, Origi, Ibe.Subs: Coutinho, Moreno, Lallana, Lucas, Skrtel, Fulton, Sinclair.
Bournemouth: Federici, Francis, Smith, Distin, Daniels, MacDonald, Pugh, Ritchie, Arter, Stanislas, Kermorgant.Subs: Cook, Rantie, King, Allsop, Tomlin, O'Kane, Cargill.
It's a much changed Manchester United side to the one, that along with Manchester City, helped send the nation to sleep in the derby on Sunday with a 0-0 draw.
There are nine changes in all, with James Wilson making his first start of the season for the Red Devils.
Mejias, Kalas, Ayala, Gibson, Friend, Leadbitter, Stephens, Nsue, Downing, De Pena, Kike.
Romero, Darmian, Smalling, Blind, Rojo, Carrick, Fellaini, Pereira, Lingard, Wilson, Memphis.
.@AndrinhoPereira scored in the last round and is the cover star of tonight's @CapitalOne_Cup #UnitedReview. pic.twitter.com/8XhYhXNs4x
It's of course Manchester United and Middlesbrough. Kicking off 15 minutes later, there's will be in any moment now...
Guzan, Hutton, Clark, Crespo, Amavi, Bacuna, Westwood, Richardson, Sanchez, Agbonlahor, Gestede.
Hennessey, Mariappa, Delaney, Dann, Kelly, Jedinak, Ledley, Zaha, Mutch, Bolasie, Bamford.
Federici, Smith, Distin, Francis, Daniels, Stanislas, Arter, MacDonald, Ritchie, Pugh, Kermorgant.
Caballero, Zabaleta, Demichelis, Mangala, Kolarov, Toure, Fernando, Navas, De Bruyne, Bony, Iheanacho.
Bogdan, Clyne, Toure, Lovren, Randall, Allen, Brannagan, Teixeira, Ibe, Firmino, Origi.
Stekelenburg, Yoshida, Caulker, Van Dijk, Targett, Wanyama, Romeu, Ward-Prowse, Juanmi, Ramirez, Pelle.
Four teams are already through, and another four will join them this evening for the quarter-final draw.
It will take place after the Liverpool game as we wait to see who will join Hull City, Everton, Stoke City and Sheffield Wednesday in the hat.
It's worth noting that regardless of the Liverpool result, there will be no waiting for other matches still in progress. Nope that doesn't make any logical sense to me neither but that's TV scheduling for you...
Last night was dominated by penalty shootout victories (and a big upset with Sheffield Wednesday dumping out Arsenal.)
But who really are the penalty kings? Sportsmail has done an investigation on the best penalty takers and our findings suggest Bournemouth might want to get this done inside 120 minutes this evening...
...but Liverpool appear to be giving it some respect, as the players arrive in suits for their clash with Bournemouth.
VIDEO: #LFC arrive at Anfield for tonight's cup tie with @afcbournemouth pic.twitter.com/AgApaPccvg
13 - Man Utd have won 13 of their last 14 home League Cup ties, though the 1 loss came v Championship opponents (C Palace, 11/12). Warning.
The giants have been tumbling out over the last couple of rounds (two of the above last night!) and it's really opened up the draw for the Capital One Cup.
Tonight we have another couple of heavyweights in action as Manchester United and Liverpool do battle in the fourth round.
Will they too fall victim to a cup shock? We will find out soon enough as I welcome you to Sportsmail's live coverage of the Capital One Cup.
Follow Sportsmail's coverage of the Capital One Cup as Manchester United host Middlesbrough and Liverpool entertain Bournemouth on a night of fourth round action.
A quarter-final spot is up for grabs when the Red Devils host the Championship outfit, while Jurgen Klopp will attempt to win his first match as Liverpool manager at the fourth attempt when his side welcome Bournemouth to Anfield.
There are two other fourth round matches, with Manchester City hosting Crystal Palace while managerless Aston Villa travel to Southampton.