Sunday, 22 May 2011 21:33
Michael Hoey made it back to back wins for HSPSE pupils when he claimed his second European Tour title with a two shot victory at the Madeira Islands Open.The  32 year old, who works with Putting Coach Phil Kenyon  fired a closing 71 to finish ten under par for the week at the  stunning Seve Ballesteros-designed Porto Santo Golfe.
The Northern  Irishman started the day level with Jamie Elson, but used his  experience to par the first seven holes before a first birdie of the day  at the eighth. Hoey finally dropped a shot at the 13th, but with  Chris Gane closing in he kept his cool and a birdie at the next  re-established his advantage.
"It was just very very tough," he  said afterwards. "I had to dig really deep, especially after I hit one  in the rocks on 13, and I thought 'that's it now, I've thrown this thing  away completely'."It's a crazy game. But I somehow managed to  make a good swing on the third shot, and holed the putt for bogey, which  was huge, it kept me in it. Then I birdied the next, and just parred in  after that. The main thing was my putting, I made virtually all the six  to seven footers on the way in.
"It's weird, because I think  everyone was struggling a bit. If someone had really gone out there and  shot a good score, then they could have got to maybe 11 or 12 under, or  maybe even better, but nobody did that. Sometimes that happens on the  final day and it's quite an ugly win, it was kind of quite ugly today.  So I'm lucky to come out on top.
Hoey's performance this week showed the progres he has made on the greens whilst working with Phil kenyon. "I guess I knew I had a good  chance this week. The last two years I finished sixth both times, and I  knew I was putting better and chipping better this year. That's what I  did well, I just chipped and putted better than the last two years. It  was also windy when I won the Estoril Open at Oitavos Dunes, and I guess  growing up in those conditions so that's an advantage".
Phil Kenyon with Michael Hoey at the Putting Studio