Shay Given was Manchester City's hero as they staged a stirring fightback to come from behind and beat Premier League leaders Chelsea in an enthralling encounter at rain-soaked Eastlands.
The Republic of Ireland keeper saved Frank Lampard's late penalty to give City a victory their huge reserves of resilience and character deserved after Chelsea took an early lead.
Chelsea looked to be maintaining their momentum at the top of the table when they went ahead after City striker Emmanuel Adebayor unfortunately diverted the ball into his own net after eight minutes.
City refused to lie down in the face of this setback and set about Chelsea with real relish, equalising before the interval when Adebayor made amends for his own goal by turning in a close-range finish after Shaun Wright-Phillips' shot fell invitingly into his path off Micah Richards.
Carlos Tevez completed the turnaround with a 20-yard free-kick after 56 minutes that flew suspiciously close to Chelsea keeper Petr Cech, although he may have been unsighted by the presence of Joleon Lescott in the penalty area.
Chelsea inevitably turned up the heat in a tumultuous Eastlands atmosphere, and looked to have snatched a point when referee Howard Webb pointed to the spot nine minutes from time after Nedum Onuoha fouled Didier Drogba.
But this was City's day - and it was confirmed as Given dived to save Lampard's spot-kick as City completed a momentous week after sealing a Carling Cup semi-final clash with derby rivals Manchester United.
Ironically, City's win cuts Chelsea's lead over United to only two points - but this was of no significance to their joyous fans as they filed out of Eastlands in ecstasy.
And for boss Mark Hughes, who shared a handshake with opposite number Carlo Ancelotti at the final whistle after his mid-week spat with Arsenal manager Arsene Wenger, this removed any pressure he has felt after seven successive Premier League draws and will act as further proof that the new Eastlands empire is now heading firmly in the right direction.
Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play.
City brought Robinho back into their line-up after Craig Bellamy was ruled out by an injury - a blow for Hughes as the Wales striker was hugely influential in the Carling Cup quarter-final win against Arsenal.
Chelsea recalled all the big guns who missed their Carling Cup loss at Blackburn, and they instantly slipped back into the smooth style that swept aside Arsenal at the Emirates last Sunday.
They opened up City in the slickest fashion after only six minutes as Deco flicked Lampard's pass nonchalantly into Drogba's path, but keeper Given was swiftly off his line to save.
It was a brief reprieve for City as Chelsea went ahead two minutes later in a moment that was laced with good fortune for the league leaders.
Given saved well from Branislav Ivanovic and Nicolas Anelka but he was helpless as the ball rebounded off Adebayor inside the six-yard box and into the net.
Chelsea's quickfire start and early goal ensured City would receive a stern examination of their credentials as challengers for a top-four spot - and it was one they answered in a positive manner throughout a thrilling first half.
Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play.
Adebayor pulled a near-post finish wide when well placed and Gareth Barry's powerful effort from outside the area deflected narrowly wide off Michael Essien as City pressed forward in a torrential Eastlands downpour.
Chelsea keeper Cech was having anxious moments as City subjected him to a bombardment from set pieces, and he was fortunate to survive a misjudgement as he came to collect a cross from Wright-Phillps 10 minutes before the interval.
Richards beat him to the ball, but Ricardo Carvalho scrambled back towards the line to make a saving header and spare his keeper's blushes.
The equaliser City's response deserved came after 37 minutes, with Adebayor getting in on the action at the right end by turning home a simple finish after a shot from Wright-Phillips bounced invitingly into his path off Richards.
Chelsea claimed the ball had hit Richards' hand, but referee Webb ignored their protests - and perhaps justice was done because replays suggested the corner that led to Adebayor's own goal had been incorrectly awarded.
The Londoners were wounded and almost went back in front when Drogba curled a free-kick inches wide from 20 yards with Given well beaten.
City, greatly encouraged by their first-half display, were in the ascendancy immediately after the break and Ivanovic was forced to scramble off the line from Adebayor after Wright-Phillips created an opening on the right.
They did not have to wait long to take the lead and complete a turnaround that demonstrated great character. Carvalho was penalised for a foul on Wright-Phillips and Tevez hit a free-kick that evaded the lurking Lescott and flew past Cech.
Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play.
Ancelotti then made a double change after 63 minutes, sending on Juliano Belletti for Carvalho and Jon Obi Mikel for Michael Ballack.
Chelsea sprung back to life as an attacking force as they went in search of an equaliser, with Ivanovic glancing Deco's free-kick just over.
City's attempt to maintain their lead was hampered by a double injury blow, with Richards hobbling off to be replaced by Onuoha and Wayne Bridge stretchered off after a shuddering collision with Belletti.
Chelsea looked like they had battled their way back into contention when they were rightly awarded a penalty after Onuoha's rash challenge on Drogba, but Given sent Eastlands wild with excitement by plunging to his right to parry away Lampard's spot-kick.
As tension mounted around the stadium - and indeed in the Manchester City technical area where Hughes and his staff were becoming increasingly animated - Drogba was agonisingly just off target after being played in by Essien's incisive pass.
Chelsea then lost captain John Terry as he limped off against the club that pursued him with such vigour in the summer - and City survived for what could become a landmark win as they attempt to challenge the Premier League's elite.
Live text and data provided by The Press Association.