Chelsea ran riot at Stamford Bridge on Saturday night with a 5-0 victory over Everton to go top of the Premier League table.
Antonio Conte's side scored twice within a 70-second period through Eden Hazard and Marcos Alonso to stun the visitors.
Diego Costa added a third before the break. Hazard later got his second and Pedro capped a stunning performance.
...but will they stay there considering the north London derby tomorrow as well as Liverpool being in action at home to Watford?
That's all from me here. You can catch the post-match fall-out on the homepage but I will leave you with the league table as it stands at the end of the evening.
Thanks for following and remember to check back tomorrow for five more Premier league games including the biggie, Arsenal v Tottenham. Cheerio.
5 - Chelsea have won five of their six Premier League home games this season, as many as they managed in the whole of 2015/16. Renaissance. pic.twitter.com/Et79r4w4QW
Chelsea win a PL home match by at least a 5-goal margin for the first time since a 6-0 victory against Arsenal on 22 March 2014. #CHEEVE
90+3min: And the Chelsea chances just keep on coming. Victor Moeses' teasing cross towards the back post evades everyone with Costa closest to tapping home.
90min: Stekelenburg's errors allowed Chelsea to set the tone by racing into a 2-0 lead but he has stopped this from going into double figures as the keeper gets down low to deny Victor Moses's low effort. There will be three minutes added on.
87min: Should Chelsea grab a sixth it will be the least they deserve and they are showing no signs of letting up. Everton have only had one shot all game and have not looked remotely close to having another. As for shots on target, forget it. Thibaut Courtois will not have an easier game between the sticks this season.
84min: Final change from Chelsea as Gary Cahill makes way for John Terry's cameo appearance, giving him the captain's armband in the process.
82min: Top save from Stekelenburg! A corner to the far post finds David Luiz and his volley into the ground looks like it's heading for the top corner until the Everton keeper tips it over the bar.
80min: As John Terry gets ready to come on shortly, it is indeed Hazard going off now to a standing ovaition as he is replaced by Batshuayi
This is the first time Maarten Stekelenburg concedes 5 goals in a league match in his career. #cheeve
78min: The Everton defence is breached again as Costa nips in behind but Williams recovers to make a crucial sliding tackle in blocking the Spaniard's shot.
75min: It looks like Eden Hazard will be denied his chance to grab a hat-trick, with Michy Batshuayi preparing to come on for the Blues.
Chelsea are still passing Everton to death but crucially this evening their possession has constantly looked dangerous. Antonio Conte's side have looked close to perfect tonight.
5 – Everton have conceded 5+ goals in a Premier League game for the first time since shipping 6 against Chelsea in August 2014. Adrift.
72min: What's this? It's Everton's FIRST shot on goal. It's not on target, let's not get carried away now, but it's not a bad effort as Kevin Mirallas's header from a Ross Barkley corner is glanced just wide.
71min: Pedro is the man going off and after getting a standing ovation from the home supporters in front of Roman Abramovich, he is replaced by Oscar.
69min: Finally Antonio Conte is looking to rest some of his stars as Oscar is getting ready to come on.
66min: A third and final sub from Everton as Barry is replaced by youngster Tom Davies.
65min: It's not just the attacks that keep coming, it's the goals too. Chelsea break through the centre and after Stekelenburg parries away a shot, Pedro is on hand to tap home the rebound. The Everton fans are heading home and I can't blame them.
63min: And the Chelsea pressure and attacks just keep on coming. Stekelenburg makes a smart save to beat away Costa's volley into the ground as Gareth Barry collects a yellow card for a foul.
60min: Yannick Bolasie's number is up as Lennon is on to replace the former Crystal Palace winger.
59min: Everton are preparing a second change with Aaron Lennon getting ready to come on. Who is the lucky Toffees player coming off?
56min: This is both brutal and exquisite. Chelsea's passing is on another level as Eden Hazard and Pedro combine, with the latter's back heel in a one-two collected by the Belgian who after cantering into the box fires home into the near post bottom corner. Everton are being made to look like lower league minnows here.
55min: Applause from the Blues supporters as John Terry begins warming up on the touchline. He won't be needed this evening, Everton cannot even get anywhere near the ball let alone the Chelsea goal as the hosts ping the ball around with ease and delight.
53min: Victor Moses's through ball is the latest to leave Everton defenders scratching their heads as Costa sneaks in behind. But Maarten Stekelenburg is quick off his line and intercepts before the Spain striker can shoot.
50min: Back come Chelsea though. Nemanja Matic charges at the Everton back four from midfield before threading in Diego Costa who sees his shot blocked behind by Ashley Williams - although an offside flag was already raised against the Spaniard.
48min: Everton start by pressing on Chelsea and they win a corner after Marcos Alonso clumsily puts the ball behind for a corner, although the Blues clear the set-piece.
0 - Chelsea didn't allow the opposition a single first half shot for the first time in the PL since Jan 2013 v Reading. Barricade.
Ronald Koeman's message to his players basically being 'you got us into this mess, now get us out of it.'
Contrasting halves for the two strikers on the pitch. Probably just about fair to say Diego Costa has edged it...
And as bad as Everton have been, Chelsea have been sensational. The scoreline is the least Chelsea deserve at the break.
It's also worth noting that the Blues have have now gone seven and a half hours without conceding a goal.
12 – Diego Costa has had a hand in more goals than any other Premier League player this season (9 goals, 3 assists). Force.
45+2min: It really should be 4-0 - at least. Pedro turns Williams on a sixpence before feeding in Costa who after charging in on goal fires wide under pressure Jagielka.
45min: We are inside two added minutes as Pedro cuts inside from the left before seeing his shot blocked out for a corner. Ronald Koeman will be desperate for half-time. Get those tea-cups at the ready and those hairdryers plugged in - the Dutchman will need both...
45min: We are inside two added minutes as Pedro cuts inside from the left before seeing his shot blocked out for a corner. Ronald Koeman will be desperate for half-time. Get those tea-cups at the ready and those hairdryers plugged in - the Dutchman will need both...
42min: I've just had to check it's not Roberto Martinez down on the Everton touchline. Phil Jagielka gives a needless corner and from it a back post cross is volleyed home by Diego Costa. Someone throw in the white towel for the Toffees. They have been dreadful.
40min: Those changes haven't really helped Everton, instead Chelsea continue to press for a third as Diego Costa somehow allows a Hazard cross to go through him.
37min: As Costa heads another cross wide with a looping effort, Koeman finally makes a tactical change as Miralls comes on for Bryan Oviedo - who leaves the pitch with a knowing understanding of the situation rather than throwing a childish tantrum like many other players do in his situation.
35min: Off the woodwork! At the other end Chelsea continue to carve open the Everton defence.
Alonso has been magnificent this half and his back post cross for Victor Moses results in the forward smashing the near post.
32min: It does indeed look like Mirallas will be coming on for Everton who are in urgent need of attacking support. Romelu Lukaku has hardly seen the ball let alone touch it.
29min: Phil Jagielka probably sums up the feelings of the travelling Everton supoport, as after losing out to David Luiz he shows his frustration by launching a verbal tirade at the referee - picking up a yellow card in the process.
26min: Promise for Everton but nothing more than that as Ross Barkley's lofted free-kick towards the back post just evades Ashley Williams.
Even if the Welshman did get his head on it though, he was already flagged offside.
23min: Everton are 2-0 down and going nowhere having hardly ventured into the Chelsea half. Kevin Mirallas is warming up for the Toffees, but will Ronald Koeman decide to make an early change.
20min: Another minute and another goal for Chelsea. Again it's not one Stekelenburg will want to look back on.
A low Pedro cross finds Marcos Alonso at the back post, whose low shot goes straight through the legs of the Everton keeper.
19min: Chelsea get the goal they deserve. Eden Hazard cuts inside from the left after picking up a Costa pass before his low curling shot across goal creeps into the bottom corner. Stekelenburg could have perhaps done a little better there in trying to save it.
15min: It's Bolasie and not Coleman into the referee's notebook first though as the midfielder fouls Victor Moses on the flank.
12min: Lots of defending for Everton in the opening moments of this game with Chelsea constantly pressing and probing. Still no real save to make for Maarten Stekelenburg though.
9min: Yikes! Seamus Coleman flies in heavily on Diego Costa on the edge of the box, leaving his stud on the shin of the Chelsea striker who now has blood seeping through the sock.
Costa limps off for more treatment before coming back on. It's as impressive he is continuing in the same manner it's astonishing that Chelsea didn't even get a free-kick for that!
Remember people, even the Undertaker was 21 and 0 at Wrestlemania before Brock Lesnar came along... yes I know WWE is scripted.
21 - Chelsea are unbeaten in their last 21 home PL games against Everton since a 0-1 loss in November 1994 (W11 D10). Streak.
5min: Good play from the Blues. N'golo Kante's crossfield ball picks out Marcos Alonso on the left but no Chelsea striker reads the full-back's low cross to the near post as Maarten Stekelenburg collects in the Toffees goal.
3min: Chelsea have been fast starters recently following early goals against Manchester United and Southampton and they have began on the front foot here too.
Yannick Bolaise is late trying to win the ball off Nemanja Matic, but the Everton winger immediately apologises to the midfielder. A rare sign of sportsmanship in the game there. Good on you, Yannick.
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more.
It's Bonfire Night and Stamford Bridge gets into the spirit with an impressive fireworks display before kick-off as the players emerge onto the pitch.
KIERAN GILL - THE NUMBERS GAME: It was that infamous nine-goal thriller at Goodison Park when the Premier League got a true taste of Diego Costa.
First impressions: an aggressive goalscorer but also a liability. Chelsea’s summer signing scored in the first and last minutes, squared up to Tim Howard and Sylvain Distin, then celebrated in Seamus Coleman’s face, risking a red card.
Costa got away with it on that occasion and Chelsea went on to win the title with him at the helm.
Last season something changed. There were boos aimed at Costa by some Chelsea supporters and it is coming up to one year since a fan unfurled a banner at Stamford Bridge that labelled him a ‘rat’ who let Jose Mourinho down.
If that was the case, he’s doing no such thing to Antonio Conte.
Chelsea: Courtois, Azpilicueta, Luiz, Cahill, Moses, Kante, Matic, Alonso, Pedro, Costa, Hazard
Substitutes: Begovic, Ivanovic, Oscar, Batshuayi, Terry, Chalobah, Aina
Everton: Stekelenburg, Coleman, Ashley Williams, Jagielka, Oviedo, Funes Mori, Barry, Bolasie, Barkley, Cleverley, Lukaku
Substitutes: Robles, Deulofeu, Mirallas, Lennon, Valencia, Davies,Holgate
#EFC (v @Chelseafc): Stekelenburg, Coleman, Jagielka, Williams, Funes Mori, Oviedo, Barry, Cleverley, Barkley, Bolasie, Lukaku. #EFCawayday
Team to face Everton: Courtois; Azpilicueta, David Luiz, Cahill (c); Moses, Kante, Matic, Alonso; Pedro, Diego Costa, Hazard. #CHEEVE
The 3pm matches are nearing their conclusion but attention will soon by turning to Stamford Bridge for the teatime kick-off between Chelsea and Everton.
Fans of both teams will be encouraged by the way they've started the campaign, with Chelsea fourth and in touch with the trio of pace-setters above them, and Everton in sixth.
It promises to be a cracking contest, with plenty of attacking talent on show.
Kick-off is at 5.30pm and we'll have all the build-up, including the two team line-ups for you shortly.
Two members of the top six in the Premier League meet at Stamford Bridge on Saturday night as Chelsea take on Everton.
Antonio Conte has enjoyed a fine start to life in England and the Blues are just one point behind the leading trio of Manchester City, Arsenal and Liverpool at the start of the weekend.
Everton have also been impressive under Ronald Koeman and are handily placed to challenge for the Champions League places.
Join DAN RIPLEY for all the action from Stamford Bridge with updates from our correspondents ROB DRAPER and SAMI MOKBEL.