HARRISBURG, Pa. (November 29, 2014) – The Missouri Comets (5-0) earned their fifth consecutive victory and remained undefeated in the 2014/15 Major Arena Soccer League season after defeating the Harrisburg Heat 24-10 at the Farm Show Arena on Saturday Night.
The Heat along with Syracuse, Baltimore and Rochester are the only teams in the league that still play under the multipoint scoring system. A total of eight players scored for the Comets and Leo Gibson added 6 more points to his league-leading season with one goal and five assists.
Harrisburg’s goalkeeper Doug Petras returned from an eleven-year retirement, however, his 20 saves were not enough for the Comets to find the back of the net in 12 different occasions.
In the first three minutes of play, Max Touloute scored twice and gave the Comets an early lead before Harrisburg’s Patrick Thompson tallied the first and only goal for the home team in the first quarter.
Moments later, Leo Gibson notched his thirteenth goal of the season before Bryan Perez and Milan Ivanovic each scored to end the first fifteen minutes with a 10-2 lead.
The second stanza had Robert Palmer tally his first of the night eighteen seconds into the quarter and again six minutes later giving the Comets a six-goal lead but Harrisburg’s Kenneth Fultz shortened for the home team ending the half with a 14-4 score.
Two fouls from Gibson and two from Stefan Stokic were the highlight of a scoreless third quarter; nevertheless, the 2,518 fans in attendance witnessed a total of eight goals in the fourth and last quarter.
After three minutes, the Comets scored three times. Perez tallied his second of the night before team captain Vahid Assadpour and Stokic each scored their first of the match.
Harrisburg’s Dave Cash pulled one back but Andre Braithwaite and Assadpour again stretched the lead. Late in the match, the Heat gained momentum and reduced the nine-goal lead after Tyler Witmer and Georges NouBossie both scored to end the match with a final score of 24-10 in favor of the Comets.
Next up, the Comets will look to extend their winning streak with back-to-back matches when they host the reigning PASL Champions Chicago Mustangs at the Independence Events Center on Friday night before visiting the Tulsa Revolution on Saturday.