The late William “Bill” Howard of Kecksburg was posthumously inducted into the Draft Horse Hall of Fame during the 99th annual PA Farm Show held recently in Harrisburg.
Inductees are chosen based on the individual's involvement in the draft horse industry throughout their lifetime, said Eric Thomas, a show representative.
“We take into consideration what the individual has accomplished in promoting the draft horse in the state of Pennsylvania through breeding, showing in ... the farm show, fairs, pulling contests, as well as any exhibitions and parades to promote the draft horse,” Thomas said.
A reading of Howard's biography, as well as a proclamation signed by state Secretary of Agriculture George D. Greig, was presented to Howard's family during the recent farm show.
The Howard family supplied a photo of its deceased patriarch to be framed and mounted at the entrance of the PA Farm Show Arena.
Howard's children and extended family were in attendance for the presentation, said Kim Martz, his daughter.
Man had a passion          for farm show
Howard was the oldest of five children raised on a farm in Acme, where his farming life began.
Martz said her father and mother, Gaile Howard, introduced Martz and the couple's six other children to the farm show at very early ages.
“I have many fond memories of the farm show with my dad and brothers, along with other family members and friends,” said Bill Howard Jr., a resident of Fayette County.
“We continue to participate in the PA Farm Show yearly to not only carry on the family tradition, but also to keep the horse activities going on in the commonwealth of Pennsylvania,” he added.
Children inherit love        for animals
Howard Jr. said he enjoys the preparation of working the teams of horses and the competition with other horse enthusiasts.
Martz said her father attended the show every year from the time he was in high school until his death in 1991, except when he served in the U.S. Navy on President Harry Truman's ship during World War II.
Howard earned many ribbons and trophies throughout the years with his sons and grandson, while being an exhibitor of his Percheron horses in various contests, Martz added.
For many years, Howard drove the governors in one of his wagons or carriages during the show's opening ceremonies, Martz said, and he also was an advocate for horse and pony contests.
Martz said when her father was no longer able to drive the teams during the pony- and horse-pulling contests, he announced the event.
Howard's love and interest in the PA Farm Show and other horse activities lives on in the life of his sons: Jim, Billy, Chart, and his grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
Honoree served                    with vigor
During his lifetime, Howard held the office of president in both the Appalachian Wagon Train and Tri-County Horse and Mule associations.
Howard's nephew, Ross Howard of Acme, also was in attendance of this year's farm show and induction ceremony.
What Ross Howard remembers about his uncle is that he was the kind of man that would do anything for anyone and recalled times Howard took his daughters to school.
Ross Howard said he spent many years working with his uncle in Country Market, the family store on Route 982 in Kecksburg.
He said Howard was a multi-faceted man with a great sense of humor who was fun to be around.
The late Howard meant many different things to many people, young and old, as proven by the outpouring of comments recently on Facebook when the family posted an announcement of his induction into the Draft Horse Hall of Fame, Ross Howard said.
“He deserves the honor. His love for animals transcends into his kids,” he said.
Daughter recalls          movie roles
Martz and her twin sister, Kelly, rode in the Pennsylvania Bicentennial Conestoga Wagon from Pittsburgh to Philadelphia with their parents in 1976, she said.
Howard was also passionate about buying and selling horses and ponies, as well as modern and antique farm machinery, Martz said.
“He was an ambassador for the industry and participated in numerous parades,” she said.
In addition, he participated in the 1984 movie “Mrs. Soffel” starring Diane Keaton and Mel Gibson, and another film about Mother Elizabeth Bayley Seton, Martz said.
“I have many fond childhood memories when I would help shine the black leather harness and brass decorations on the harness, and of scrubbing and shining the wagons Dad and my brothers used for the hitch classes,” she said.
Kelly Vernon is a staff writer with Trib Total Media. She can be reached at 724-547-5722 or kvernon@tribweb.com.