Dunia golf olf baru saja kehilangan salah satu putra terbaiknya.  Severiano  Ballesteros telah wafat kemaren, 7 Mei 2011, setelah 2 tahun  berjuang  melawan kanker otak ganas.
Seve was a truly great golfer. His creativity in shot-making brought exuberance to the game.
So long, Seve. May you rest in peace!
Hearing   that Seve Ballesteros has died, I close my eyes. I see a beach in   Northern Spain. On the beach I see a black-haired, barefoot boy playing   golf in a dirty T-shirt and jeans.
Legend has it that  Seve and  his caddie friends played with pebbles instead of golf balls,  but I  doubt that. A caddie might not have two pesos to rub together,  but he  always has a scuffed-up ball or two in his pocket.
I  see the  black-haired boy in the dunes with the club that one of his  brothers has  made for him — a 3-iron head attached to a sturdy stick.  It is the  boy's only club, so he is learning to hit every kind of shot  with it.  The high shot. The low shot. The shot that curves.
I  have never  been to the Bay of Santander, but surely it's a golfer's  shore of gray  beaches and grassy dunes. You don't take up the ancient  game on a  soft-sand beach covered with cabanas and sunbathers.
I  see the  boy scowling over his ball, which is half buried in sand under  a  cascading clump of marron grass. His black eyes and bushy eyebrows  are  as expressive as an actor's, but he isn't acting. He's looking  beyond  the dune to his target, where a smirking opponent waits.
People   will marvel at the grown-up Seve's composure when he finds his ball   behind a tree or under a bush. They won't know how to read his   tight-lipped smile. They won't understand that for Seve, trouble is   home.
I see the boy digging his toes into the sand and  dipping  his right shoulder, lifting his head toward the target once,  twice,  three times, and then taking a vicious swing, sounding a mighty  whump,  stumbling backwards under a fan of windblown sand, and his eyes,  those  glaring black eyes, following the ball as it chugs across the  sky, half  in sunlight and half in shadow, before landing with a splat a  foot from a  hand-dug hole. His opponent, an older caddie, drops his  club and falls  to his knees.
Seve's weapon will be the dagger, never the sword.
Hearing that Seve Ballesteros has died, I open my eyes. I see that the clock has changed from 5:06 to 5:07.