This section is similar to the Who Are Ya page in the fanzine, that aims to provide a current preview of our opponents. This page acts as a season preview and will not be updated unless outdated.
The format for the 2016 involves the fourteen teams of the Midwest Region split into West and East Conferences of seven teams a piece. Each conference will play a home-and-home schedule for 12 games. Dayton joins the six Michigan teams in the West Conference, while Cleveland and the two Indiana teams are lumped in with the Pennsylvania and Western New York teams.
The Subbuteo figures show the last known home and away kits for each team, in that order. We’ll update this info as the season approaches and more information is available.
The National Premier Soccer League was formed in 2003 as the Men’s Professional Soccer League with just six teams, and changed its name with expansion into the Midwest in 2005, when Detroit Arsenal were its first winners under the new banner. It has grown over the years to a league with around 70-80 teams split across regional conferences.
The NPSL has never had a repeat winner. Since its formation it has had 13 different champions. The 2015 champion was New York Cosmos B, beating Chattanooga FC in the final. The final was watched by a record 18,227 crowd in Chattanooga, who had also previously broken the league attendance record in the semi-final.
Co-founders of GLPL with us a year ago, AFCAA was the first team to visit us at Houseman Field on a cold and wet May evening last year.
They made the jump with us to the NPSL and we look forward to a good rivalry with them, although they won’t be our nearest league opponent any more.
Ann Arbor boasted one of the best goalkeepers in the GLPL last season, but TJ Tomasso left to join Toledo United. The Mighty Oak was strangely vulnerable when it visited GR, giving up 5 goals. Domenic Barone’s hat-trick in a 33 minute spell that night was as many as the rest of the league managed all season.
The game at Hollway, right across from the Big House, was more indicative of the kind of game they played all year, the tight affair ended 0-0, the best two chances coming late as a bullet Tyler Fischer header was parried by Tomasso, and Ben Darling making an outstanding tackle at the other end to save a point.
Ann Arbor will have a new coaching staff this season and will need to replace a couple of top players who defected to Toledo.
Last season, they played in light and dark blue hoops at home (Sporting KC style) and, perhaps surprisingly for a team from their city, all green away.
Hollway Field is a decent sized stadium holding 5,000. Their attendances fluctuated wildly last season but were never lower than say Lansing United’s numbers.
Their SG is called Main Street Hooligans, named after the city’s main downtown strip just a short drive from the stadium. They didn’t travel in huge numbers last season but given the weather it was not surprising.
We travel to Ann Arbor on the exact anniversary of our first meeting last season, a first ever Monday match for us on Memorial Day, May 30th. We attempt to #CutDownTheOak at Houseman on July 8th.
While all the talk from this region was about a possible lower tier pro team muscling their way into Detroit, not many saw this coming. FC Cincinnati announced a USL-Pro franchise in the Queen City and suddenly things weren’t looking good for Cincinnati Saints. So they did the reverse of what the old Dayton Dynamo did in the mid-90s when they upped and left and became the Cincinnati Silverbacks.
The new club decided to retain the old Dayton Dynamo identity, but added a new logo inspired by its aeronautical history.
Their 2016 kit was revealed in late March, and it avoids the use of an away kit by either team when playing GRFC. We’ll be able (will have to) wear blue away, and they will probably have to wear their white at our place. A shame, as that’s a snazzy away kit.
We travel to Dayton for our longest ever road trip (297 miles each way) on June 19th, and host them two weeks later at Houseman on July 3rd.
Somehow Le Rouge didn’t make it onto our lengthy friendly schedule last season, so the matches between these two teams are highly anticipated, at least from this side of the state.
Detroit City are the poster club for the northern half of the NPSL. Their opening season in 2012 attracted a solid attendance average in the 1500 range, and they have never looked back, selling out Cass Tech’s capacity of around 3,800 for the last season and a half.
Faced with that dilemma, DCFC are moving. They’re technically staying within the boundaries of the City of Detroit, but will be helping refurbish the 6,000 capacity Keyworth Stadium in the enclave city of Hamtramck.
Their record attendance of 3,884 will no doubt be eclipsed in 2016, more than likely at their home opener. Between their stadium and ours, the state of Michigan will be making some serious noise on the minor league soccer scene next season!
DCFC are on a 15-game winning streak at home, their last defeat being in July 2013. Since formation in 2012 they have been there or thereabouts every season.
Detroit play in maroon at home, and some combination of white and gold away. The team’s colors and identity are a reflection of the City of Detroit flag, while the logo features The Spirit of Detroit statue. The club’s main SG is named Northern Guard.
We face Detroit at home on June 10th, and travel to Hamtramck on July 1st. They are the only league opponent that we meet at home first this season.
A brand new team that was announced with precious little fanfare on December 1st, they have gradually come out with their name, logo and venue... somehow they did enough to impress the NPSL into accepting them. They’re apparently going under the abbreviation of KZFC to avoid confusion with a crappy chicken chain.
There will be a familiar look to their squad, as Beau Prey has already signed for them and other Kalamazoo-based members of our 2015 roster are rumored to have committed to them.
We travel down US-131 on June 5th, two days after our trip east to Lansing; while the return match is two weekends later on June 17th.
LanU were the first team we ever played in a fully fledged match, back on May 9th 2015. At Archer Stadium we both put out marginally weakened teams and ran off 1-0 winners thanks to a glorious strike from Domenic Barone twenty minutes from time, as well as an incredible triple save from Beau Prey on his way to a clean sheet.
The return match just over a month later started out very much a B squad game as we’d played a league match at A2 the night before, and LanU were due to play Detroit the next night. After an even first half the game was blown open by the introduction of the Barones around half-time, and GRFC walked off 4-1 winners.
As a result, LanU are the only team we have a 100% record against. Not much to be read into this, as the second game in particular was very much an exhibition. With both sides fielding first teams this should be a great rivalry in the making.
We can thank LanU for being the final nail in the decision to bring a team to GR. We figured if they could have a team, we should!
Home stadium Archer Stadium holds 1,500, they switch to the larger DeMartin Stadium for home matches with DCFC, who helped them to a 2,014 crowd in 2014.
In their first season Lansing reached the national semi-final, but slipped to 6th of 13 in the Midwest last season, four points short of a playoff berth.
Lan U play in light blue and white hoops (like the Argentine rugby team) and red shorts, wearing white away. The SG is named Sons of Ransom, named after the founder of Oldsmobile, Ransom Eli Olds, a significant part of the history of the city.
We meet our closest league rivals for the first time in official play on June 3rd in the capital, while they must wait until our final league game for the trip back, on July 15th.
This nomadic club has moved around the Metro Detroit area since its inception. They were initially the Windsor FC Spartans but moved across the river and joined the NPSL in 2013 as FC Sparta, playing in Berkley. The next year they were purchased by Dearborn Sports and renamed Michigan Stars, playing in Dearborn.
As of 2015, they play at Wisner Stadium in Pontiac, a 6,600 capacity venue. Despite the large building they struggle to attract a decent crowd. Perhaps the club’s nomadic existence and morphing identity plays into their low support, issues that plagued West Michigan Edge, the last minor league team in the GR area.
Last year they played in yellow and blue, wearing white and red away. We travel to Pontiac for our first NPSL match on May 20, and meet them again just seven days later at Houseman.
Those teams we may play if we get into the playoffs would include Erie Commodores, FC Buffalo, Indiana Lions (Lafayette), Indy 11 B (formerly Indiana Fire) and the delightfully named expansion club Rochester RiverDogZ.
We are also playing four home friendlies, against Ole SC, Muskegon Risers, Force FC and Oakland County, who we know from last season as Oakland United. We will also visit our crosstown neighbors Ole at Lee Field. We’ll add pieces on them shortly.
This local club has been a member of the youth setup of West Michigan for the past seven years. They filled in our slot in the old GLPL, now named the PLA, for the 2016 season. We meet them at Houseman Field in the season opener on May 6th, and return the favor in an historic first midweek GRFC match at Lee Field in Wyoming on June 29th.
Oakland County joined us in the GLPL last season as a new club under the name of Oakland United. They gave themselves a very topical name change for the second season of action in the PLA.
We lost 2-1 away in our first ever league match, but in the return at Houseman we put in a solid performance with a 3-0 win. This season we meet Oakland at home in a friendly on May 22nd.