HAPPY NEW YEAR Bollywood Movie 2014 | Shahrukh Khan, Deepika Padukone | Trailer Launch Full Show "Shah Rukh Khan's 'Happy New Year" Bollywood stars have been having a good run at the international box office over the past year, from Hrithik Roshan and Katrina Kaif‘s current release Bang Bang to Salman Khan in Kick this summer. Next up is arguably the best-known global Bollywood hitmaker, Shah Rukh Khan, in Happy New Year (see trailer below). Set for day-and-date release on Friday in India, North America, Australia, the UK, UAE and elsewhere, the heist pic reunites Khan with his Om Shanti Om and Chennai Express co-star Deepika Padukone, and Om Shanti Om helmer and Chennai Express choreographer Farah Khan. Add to those ingredients the strategic release falling during the Diwali holiday period and this confection could do mega-business at home and across the diaspora.Local movies in India make up about 90% of the market share and Bollywood A-listers are so popular that each release is an event at home and abroad. Shah Rukh Khan, aka SRK, is considered by many to currently be the biggest Bollywood star in the world. He’s also been listed by Wealth-X as the 2nd richest actor on the planet with a net worth of $600M. In 2013, he was ranked by Forbes India as the No. 1 Bollywood earner and celebrity. But he hasn’t had a huge international release since Chennai in 2013. Normally, his big titles go out during the Eid al Fitr holiday in August as Chennai did, but he stepped off that date this year, leaving the path open for rival Salman Khan’s Kick which went on to great success.
SRK is now poised with Happy New Year to turn the tables. Records set last year by Chennai Express with Padukone and SRK were bested only by all-time record breaker Dhoom 3 with Kaif and Aamir Khan. Dhoom 3 opened to $3.3M in North America last December, eclipsing Chennai‘s previous record of $2.23M. Respectively, they went on to earn about $8M and $5.3M in the U.S. and Canada. But there are devout Bollywood followers