The team moved from Wadebridge to St Kew due to U15's and U16's playing at the main ground.
Launceston's first attack on the left hand side of the pitch after kick off was stopped short of the line. Pressure mounted on the right by Launceston with Harvey Aldridge passing inside to Corey Sillifant securing the first try of the match to Launceston.
Great pressure by Launceston using the left wing again and some fantastic defending by Wadebridge followed. More pressure followed by Launceston, this time down the right with Harvey Aldridge scoring this time.
Wadebridge started to put the pressure on now resulting in a knock-on and a penalty scrum. The ball moved to the right by Wadebridge but was eventually bundled into touch. Launceston cleared the ball with a kick putting Wadebridge back under pressure once more. Wadebridge kicked into touch well in to their half, allowing Joe Inman to score his first try with Launceston.
This was a match was proving hard work for both teams. Launceston's Josh Mannino managed to make a break through the middle of the pitch fending off a gang of Wadebridge's lads, finally scoring a try.
The Wadebridge lads stepped up a mark keen to score before half time and took a quick penalty catching the Launceston lads off guard and scored a try (and converted), making the half time result  7-20 in Launceston's favour.
The start of the second half saw Launceston in the unusual position of being 'on top' and they desperately wanted it to stay that way but Wadebridge came out fighting and Launceston really defended well. Unfortunately for Wadebridge a knock on gave Launceston a quick penalty resulting in a runaway Charlie Crichton (U14's) scoring a try and converting.
The hard work continued by Launceston with Harvey Aldridge working the ball across the field, passed back to Corey Sillifant and another try ensued. This game was getting quite intense with Wadebridge keen to get more possession of the ball. A penalty against Launceston was given, used well by Wadebridge putting in a try, giving the Wadebridge lads a boost.  This resulted in some hard defending by Launceston but it was no good, Wadebridge managed to turn the ball over in the scrum and a further try (not converted).
It was now getting towards full time and the Launceston lads were pulling out all stops to ensure a win and with a couple of metres from Wadebridge's try line, what seemed to be a mountain of bodies and no ball in sight, the ball finally landed on the try line by Joe Inman.
A great game with both sides giving it their all. Man of the match this week went to the whole of Launceston team and our thanks to the U14's (Laurie Armstrong, Alfie Craddock, Charlie Crichton and Harvey Fry) for their support and encouragement. Final score 17-37.