The United States Open Championship, commonly known as the U.S. Open, is the annual  open golf tournament of the United States. It is the second of the four  major championships in golf and is on the official schedule of both the  PGA Tour and the  European Tour. It is staged by the  United States Golf Association in mid-June, scheduled such that the final round is always played on the third Sunday, which is  Father's Day. From 2008, it will also be an official money event on the  Asian Tour, with 50% of Asian Tour members' earnings counting towards the Order of Merit.
The U.S. Open is staged at a variety of courses, set up in such a way that scoring is very difficult with a premium placed on accurate driving. U. S. Open play is characterized by tight scoring at or around par by the leaders, with the winner emerging at just under par. Torrey Pines in 2008 is a classic example. A U.S. Open course is seldom beaten severely, and there have been many over-par wins. Normally, an Open course is longer than normal and will have a high cut of rough (termed "Open rough" by the American press and fans), hilly greens (such as at  Pinehurst No. 2 in 2005, which was described by  Johnny Miller of  NBC as "like trying to hit a ball on top of a  VW Beetle"), and pinched fairways. Some courses that are attempting to get into the rotation for the U.S. Open will normally be rebuilt to have these features.  Rees Jones is the most notable of the "Open Doctors" who take on these projects.
The first U.S. Open Championship was played on  October 4, 1895, on a nine-hole course in  Newport, Rhode Island. It was a 36-hole competition and was played in a single day. Ten professionals and one amateur entered. The winner was a 21-year-old Englishman named  Horace Rawlins, who had arrived in the U.S. in January that year to take up a position at the host club. He received $150 cash out of a prize fund of $335, plus a $50 gold medal; his club received the Open Championship Cup trophy, which was presented by the USGA. In the beginning, the tournament was dominated by experienced British players until 1911, when  John J. McDermott became the first native-born American winner. American golfers soon began to win regularly and the tournament evolved to become one of the four  majors.
Throughout the modern history of the competition, the title has been won almost exclusively by players from the United States. Since 1950, players from only five nations other than the United States have won the championship, most notably South Africa, which has won five times since 1965.
A streak of four consecutive non-American winners occurred from 2004 to 2007 for the first time since 1910. These four players—South African  Retief Goosen (2004), New Zealander  Michael Campbell (2005), Australian  Geoff Ogilvy (2006) and Argentinian  Ángel Cabrera (2007) —are all from countries in the  Southern Hemisphere. No player from Europe has won since  Tony Jacklin of England in 1970.
The 2008 edition of the Open ended in a tie between Tiger Woods and  Rocco Mediate forcing an 18 hole playoff on Monday morning. After completing 90 holes over 5 days, both players were still tied, marking only the 3rd time in Open history that a winner was determined using sudden death. On the first sudden death hole (# 7), Woods made par to Mediate's bogey becoming only the 6th player to win 3 or more US Opens.
The U.S. Open is open to any professional, or to any amateur with an up-to-date USGA Handicap Index not exceeding 1.4. Players (male or female) may obtain a place by being fully exempt or by competing successfully in qualifying. The field is 156 players.
About half of the field is made up of players who are fully exempt from qualifying. There are seventeen full exemption categories, including winners of the U.S. Open for the last ten years and the other three majors for the last five years, the top 30 from the previous year's PGA Tour money list, the top 15 from the previous year's European Tour money list, and the top 50 in the  Official World Golf Rankings as of two weeks before the tournament.
Potential competitors who are not fully exempt must enter the Qualifying process, which has two stages. Firstly there is Local Qualifying, which is played over 18 holes at over 100 courses around the United States. Many leading players are exempt from this first stage, and they join the successful local qualifiers at the Sectional Qualifying stage, which is played over 36 holes in one day at several sites in the U.S. and one each in Europe and Japan.
There is no lower age limit and the youngest ever qualifier was 15-year-old  Tadd Fujikawa of Hawaii, who qualified in 2006.
The purse at the 2007 U.S. Open was $7 million, and the winner's share was $1.26 million. The  PGA European Tour uses conversion rates at the time of the tournament to figure the official prize money used in their Order of Merit rankings (€5,241,402 in 2007). In line with the other majors, winning the U.S. Open gives a golfer several privileges that make his career much more secure, if he is not already one of the elite of the sport. U.S. Open champions are automatically invited to play in the other three majors (the  Masters, the Open Championship (British Open), and the  PGA Championship) for the next five years, as well as the near-major  Players Championship, and they are exempt from qualifying for the U.S. Open itself for ten years. They may also receive a five-year exemption on the PGA Tour, which is automatic for regular members. Non-PGA Tour members who win the U.S. Open have the choice of joining the PGA Tour either within 60 days of winning, or prior to the beginning of any one of the next five tour seasons.
The top fifteen finishers at the U.S. Open are fully exempt from qualifying for the following year's Open, and the top eight are automatically invited to the following season's Masters.
^ Many early U.S. Opens were won by English and Scottish golfers who learned the game in their own country and moved to America as adults to take up positions as club professionals. Their original countries are shown unless they are known to have become U.S. citizens before their victories, as is the case with English born and raised Jim Barnes and Scottish born and raised Tommy Armour. Harry Vardon and Ted Ray made only short term visits to the U.S. to play tournament golf.
The following golfers have won the U.S. Open more than once through 2008.
There is an extensive records section on the official site  here.