For three periods Saturday afternoon at the Silverstein Eye Centers Arena, the Missouri Comets could do no wrong against Central Division rival Chicago.
The Comets led 5-1 and looked like a different team than the one that lost to the Mustangs 10-3 in their last Silverstein Eye Centers Arena visit a month ago.
Then Adolfo “Bofo” Bautista showed the Comets and the 3,308 fans in attendance why he is considered one of the most dangerous players in the game.
The colorful Bofo – who wears No. 100, sports platinum blonde hair and wears a white glove on one hand and a red on the other – exploded for three fourth-quarter goals, collecting the hat trick with just 50 seconds left in the game and the Comets leading 7-6.
The turned out to be the final score as Comets goalie Boris Pardo stood tall in the net and did not allow another score as the Comets regained the Central Division lead with a 13-3 record. The Mustangs fell to 13-4.
“The fourth quarter proved that no matter how well you play for three quarters, the game is not over until the final horn sounds,” said Pardo, who starred in the net along with Mustangs goalie Jesus Flores.
“We played so well for three quarters, totally dominating the game, and then Bofo just took the game over. He can score from any place on the field. He has vision most players don’t have, and if he’s not scoring, he can make perfect passes to set up his teammates. His ability to master time and space on the field was so evident late in the game, but we won, and that’s all that matters tonight.”
One Bofo goal came while he was on his back on the turf and he somehow managed to kick the ball between the legs of the stunned Missouri goalkeeper.
The Mustangs embarrassed the Comets in their last trip to Independence and Leo Gibson said he and his teammates would not allow that to happen again.
“Physically and mentally, we were ready to go this afternoon,” said Gibson, chosen the Borden Man of the Match, as he scored a goal and had three assists. “They came into our building and embarrassed us the last time we played them. We were so focused today, and we played great soccer until the fourth quarter. Luckily for us, we were able to hold on at the end and get a big win.
“This game had a playoff atmosphere and we might face them again. It feels so good to win this game.”
Missouri and Chicago created several opportunities in the first quarter, but the lone goal came from Missouri’s Kevin Ten Eyck, with just 45 seconds left in the period.
Two minutes into the second quarter, Chicago’s Martinez found the back of the net to knot the score at 1-all, but the Comets quickly answered with goals coming from Vahid Assadpour, Stefan Stokic and Gibson to make it a 4-1 game at halftime.
Robert Palmer scored the only goal of the third quarter to set the stage for the dramatic final quarter.
Ramon Palmer scored to make it 6-1, then Lucas Rodriguez scored 10:05 to give Missouri a 7-3 lead. Ironically, it turned out to be the game-winner as Bofo dominated the final five minutes of play.
“The first three quarters were classic, very good soccer by the boys,” Comets coach Vlatko Andonovski said. “We looked like a championship team. We certainly didn’t look like a championship team the last time we played Chicago, and we did not look like a championship team in the final five minutes, but we found a way to keep them from tying the game and we were able to win it – and it was a very big win.
“To win, after we lost to them (10-3) was very important. Our boys were focused, they were ready mentally and physically. We made some late mistakes and we will address those mistakes. You cannot have any mental or physical lapses when you play a team with the talent of a Chicago Mustangs team. I was not happy with the final few minutes, but I leave here today very happy with the victory.”
• Moments after the game ended, the SEC Arena maintenance crew took up the turf while many of the players from both teams were on the field, visiting with fans in a post-game celebration. The Missouri Mavericks were playing hockey later that night and the crew made sure the game started on time at 7:05 p.m. The Comets game had a 1 p.m. start.
“The arena crew is amazing,” Comets defender Brian Harris said. “We’re out there talking with fans and all of a sudden, the turf is up and they’re getting ready for the hockey game.”