Chelsea suffered their first Premier League defeat of the season as Liverpool continued their excellent form in the capital with a 2-1 victory at Stamford Bridge.
The Blues suffered a lapse of concentration to allow Dejan Lovren, returning after an eye injury, to open the scoring with a far post finish before Jordan Henderson unleashed a contender for Goal of the Season with a 30-yard screamer into the top corner.
Diego Costa pulled a goal back for the hosts after the interval, but Chelsea could not find an equaliser to leave Liverpool unbeaten after three games in London this term.
Despite pulling a goal back, Chelsea never did put Liverpool under enough pressure to force an equaliser and as a result the Reds leave London again with points in the bag.
Having already won at Arsenal and been unfortunate not to pick up more than a draw at Tottenham, Jurgen Klopp's side are daunting opposition right now as they move into the top four.
More to come from the Stamford Bridge action on the homepage but that's all from me here. I will leave you with the updates top of the table. Thanks for following and cheerio.
5 - Liverpool have won five of their last nine PL visits to Stamford Bridge, having won just one of their first 16 trips there. Tide.
Conte loses at home in the league as a manager for first time since 6 January 2013 (Juventus 2-1 Serie A loss versus Sampdoria) #CHELIV #EPL
90+4min: But Costa is flagged offside and that should just about be that...
90+3min: Everyone back defending for Liverpool now. Chelsea have one last chance as they have the ball in the the Reds half.
90min: Final change from Jurgen Klopp as Kevin Stewart comes on to replace Georginio Wijnaldum. There will be three added minutes at Stamford Bridge.
89min: It's Fabregas who strikes the free-kick, but it's very poor as the ball hits the wall and the Reds clear their lines from it.
88min: Free-kick to Chelsea as Hazard is fouled by Lucas who is booked. Perhaps harsh but now the Blues have a set-piece just 20 yards from goal. David Luiz stands over...
87min: That seemed very late for Chelsea to make those changes. This game hasn't really had much direction since Costa pulled a goal back, but those substitutions have rejuvenated Chelsea who are now back on the attack and applying the pressure.
84min: Conte is using all of his changes, and of course Batshuayi is not one of them! Victor Moses, Cesc Fabregas and Pedro replace Matic, Willian and Oscar.
82min: Second change for Liverpool as Lucas comes on to replace Coutino, who doesn't look at all happy about being replaced.
81min: Big save! Liverpool work the ball down the left where a deflected cross finds Origi at the back post.
The striker peels off Luiz but his downward header is somehow kept out by Courtois. Should score but very smart stop. Could be pivotal...
80min: Changes are on the way, and that includes Chelsea with Conte finally looking like admitting someone on that £120million bench might be of some use.
Michy Batshuayi could be getting ready to join the attack.
78min: It's been a rather scrappy last 10 minutes, which suits Liverpool down to the ground as they attempt to wind down the clock.
The Reds create a half-chance though as Philippe Coutinho's low shot across goal inside the box is blocked by Gary Cahill.
'My Italian colleague in the press box tells me Conte is shouting 'why, why?' to the players in his native language.
'At the moment, they are answering his questions after a quiet first half. Conte may still be appalled by some stray passes but Chelsea have had Liverpool on the back foot in the second half.
'They have started to hit the ball a little longer to beat Liverpool's high press, Matic is driving the team forward and Diego Costa scored with his first shot. Conte's side may yet rescue something from this.'
'Klopp in animated discussion with fourth official Bobby Madley showing him how David Luiz has a hold of his strikers when he competes for the ball. Madley shrugged him off. Klopp sat back down. Simmering away.'
67min: Just over 20 minutes to go and Antonio Conte has still not turned to the bench.
Liverpool are finding their feet again but they are not showing anywhere near the threat they did in the first period.
64min: Football really is a strange game. Five minutes ago Liverpool looked so comfortable at 2-0 up. Now they are very fortunate to still be leading as Costa brings down a long ball on the egde of the box before firing straight at Mignolet.
He looked slighky offside but the flag didn't go up and the Reds survive.
61min: Finally cracks appear in the Liverpool defence, and Chelsea take full advantage!
After patient passing all over the pitch from Chelsea, Eden Hazard's pass into the box finds Nemanja Matic, whose byline chipped ball to the feet of Diego Costa is tapped home by the striker. That's just about his first touch of the half!
60min: An hour gone and Liverpool have not looked like adding to their two first half goals.
57min: First change of the evening as former Chelsea striker Daniel Sturridge is booed off by a minority of the home crowd as he is replaced by Divock Origi - who by contrast is greeted by a chant from Liverpool fans as he arrives on the pitch.
54min: Splendid ball from David Luiz, whose long ball finds Diego Costa down the left channel as Chelsea continue to probe an opening in the Liverpool back four.
Luiz's first Blues appearance in his second spell has been conservative so far. Not many needless risks from the defender.
51min: As you were with Liverpool inviting the Chelsea pressure. Jurgen Klopp's side look set up for the counter attack but still no second half chances as Simon Mignolet punches away a whipped Willian cross.
48min: Low key start but the half begins with Chelsea controlling possession. No chances as yet but the home fans are encouraged and are finding their voices again.
It's been a very quiet first half for Diego Costa. No arguments, no scuffles, no fouls, no goals and hardly any touches.
In fact the Blues striker has had just two inside the Liverpool box, and his heat map shows his most dominant area of the pitch has been inside the centre circle taking kick-off. The Blues need to get him involved more in the second half.
'The reaction of the Chelsea players is embarrassing. I don't know if they are zonal or man marking that's how poor it is,' Carragher said on Sky Sports.
'There's four Chelsea players free doing nothing. I can't belive at this level of football a goal happens like that.'
And by that I mean the source of goal scorers. Dejan Lovren and Jordan Henderson are the surprise goal getters.
Henderson's strike was sensational, Lovren's goal though was a by-product of terrible defending. Whatever way you dice it though, Liverpool fully deserve their 2-0 lead at the break.
15 - Since Jurgen Klopp took charge, Liverpool have scored 15 goals from outside the box in the PL, five more than any other side. Range.
A few boos from the home fans at half-time. Can their side up their game in the second period though? Liverpool with a fully deserved lead at the break.
45min: Into one minute added time and Willian is booked for dissent. Even the Chelsea fans half-time - it's all gone very quiet inside Stamford Bridge.
42min: Conte will be wanting half-time here. Chelsea are causing the Liverpool defence no problems whatsoever. They need a rethink at the break, Liverpool by contrast would be more than happy to skip the 15-minute time out.
39min: It was perfection in more ways than one for Hendrson, not only was his strike prefect, the timing of it was too.
Chelsea were starting to build steam before the break but they have had the stuffing knocked out of them again following that Henderson strike - which will at thev ery least be a serious contender for goal of the month.
36min: Big Sam would't have liked Jordan Henderson and his earlier shot on goal, the England manager will love this though... even as a neutral I love this!
The England midfielder collects an Adam Lallana cut-back 25 yards out before curling a shot across goal and lobbing the ball into the top corner. It's perfection to the point that Courtois had absolutely no chance. What a strike!
34min: Willian clips the ball into the near post where Luiz flicks the ball on, but the defender is ruled offside. The Blues are starting to buil m ore attacks although Diego Costa has endured a very quiet first half so far.
As a consequence that means very few kicks and no yellow cards as yet.
33min: Chelsea are getting back into the game now. N'golo Kante and Willian fire off target, while the Blues now have a free-kick wide on the left after Nathaniel Clyne chops down Eden Hazard - rather needlessly too as the Belgian was running away from goal.
'So far it has not been the most auspicious of returns to Chelsea for David Luiz. First of all, Chelsea's former and new centre back was complicit in leaving three Liverpool players unmarked at back post when Dejan Lovren opened the scoring, then he got a hefty smack in the nose from Sadio Mane's head.
'It's already looking like a reasonably good game for John Terry, who's sitting, injured, in the stands. JT has seen off a few pretenders in his time but Luiz might yet be the first he outlasts twice.'
25min: Still Liverpool are creating the better chances as from an acute angle, Sturridge blasts a low shit wide across goal. Chelsea just cannot get going.
22min: Even David Luiz is seeing red now, albeit that's because he has drawn blood. The defender is forced off for a moment with a nosebleed after he headbutts the back of Sadio Mane's head trying to win an aerial ball.
20min: Antonio Conte will be fuming with his side's start. Chelsea have been nowhere and are still on the back foot as Liverpool maintain possession, and with it total control of this game.
17min: Liverpool have looked more alert so it's to little surprise they catch Chelsea cold with a quick free-kick to open the scoring.
Philippe Coutinho exchanges passes with James Milner on the left before his back post cross finds Dejan Lovren in acres of space, with the defender applying the finish across goal.
Don't ask me who was trying to pick him up - there wasn't a blue shirt anywhere near him.
16min: Poor, and that's being nice. Chelsea fail to deal with a Liverpool corner but it results in Jordan Henderson blasting well over the crossbar. Big Sam won't like that either...
14min: I wonder what Sam Allardyce is making of all this? The England manager is present inside Stamford Bridge this evening, and all he has seen so far is constant short passes that are not really going anywhere. Wouldn't happen under Big Sam's watch...
11min: Cracks appearing in the Chelsea defence? It's Gary Cahill who escapes committing a defensive cardinal sin by passing the ball across his own penalty box, witha  Liverpool forward just missing out on intercepting. That was a bit too close for comfort for the Blues.
8min: Silly from Branislav Ivanovic as the Chelsea defender needlessly trips Adam Lallana out wide on the right to give Liverpool a free-kick. The Blues however survive the set-piece.
5min: Liverpool have started with a buzz in the early stages. They are not exactly dominating but the Blues haven't exactly thrown much forward in terms of attacking play so far.
David Luiz has started solidly enough at the back. Control and passing all up to scratch so far.
2min: Thibaut Courtois is a VERY lucky boy! Liverpool break on the Blues with Sadio Mane spraying the ball out to Daniel Sturridge on the right.
The striker cuts inside before shooting on goal with his left foot straight at the keeper.
But the Belgian allows what looks like a routine save to squirm through his fingers, with the ball stopping dead just short of the goal line.
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more.
A few floodlights go out at Stamford Bridge, as only part of the pitch is lit up as the players walk on.
Chelsea would go top ahead of this weekend's games with a win this evening, while Liverpool could leapfrog the Blues with three points at Stamford Bridge.
JAMES DUTTON: Over the past decade, Liverpool and Chelsea have developed one of the most unlikely yet fierce rivalries in the Premier League.
While attention has been dominated by the 22 players on the pitch, and match-ups that have seen the likes of Steven Gerrard, Fernando Torres and Luis Suarez do battle with Frank Lampard, John Terry and Didier Drogba.
But when they go head-to-head once again on Friday night at Stamford Bridge, you would be forgiven for allowing your attention to drift to the touchline as the two most animated and excitable managers in the Premier League meet for the first time.
Keep calm and start the countdown: 30 minutes! #DL30 #DavidLuiz #Chelsea #PremierLeague #ContagemRegressiva30minutos pic.twitter.com/wD4GTMQGR9
'Jurgen Klopp's been staring at the Chelsea warm-up very, very intently for about quarter of an hour now. Slightly unnerving.
'He's finally moved now but Klopp was standing about a yard from the half way line, back to his own players, watching Chelsea rondo etc'
The Brazilian has wasted no time settling back into London, he is wearing boots with the word 'geezer' on the side.
Here is their league record without Roberto Firmino starting since Jurgen Klopp took over:
Played 10, won 1, drew 6, lost 3.
Chelsea received a bizarre good luck message from the band KISS on Friday just hours before their Premier League clash with Liverpool.
As Antonio Conte was preparing his players for the visit of Jurgen Klopp's team to Stamford Bridge, it's unlikely he would have expected such a gesture from one of the world's most famous rock bands.
They also claim, in the video, which Chelsea posted on their Twitter account, to be supporters of the Blues.
KIERAN GILL: Antonio Conte's Chelsea and Jurgen Klopp's Liverpool lock horns in a tasty Friday night fixture to get the weekend going.
But which manager has a better squad to select from going into this Premier League showdown at Stamford Bridge?
Here, Sportsmail picks our combined XI of Chelsea and Liverpool players (not including those unavailable, such as John Terry or Emre Can).
Honestly, that's a wild guess from me. Judging by the faces around him he could just as likely be telling a joke.
Chelsea: Courtois, Ivanovic, Cahill, Luiz, Azpilicueta, Kante, Matic, Willian, Oscar, Hazard, Costa.Subs: Begovic, Alonso, Fabregas, Pedro, Moses, Batshuayi, Aina.
Liverpool: Mignolet, Clyne, Matip, Lovren, Milner, Lallana, Henderson, Wijnaldum, Mane, Coutinho, Sturridge.Subs: Karius, Grujic, Moreno, Lucas, Origi, Stewart, Oviemuno Ejaria.
Chelsea make one expected change from the side that drew 2-2 at Swansea City on Sunday as David Luiz comes into the side to replace the injured John Terry.
It will be the Brazilian's first appearance for the club since rejoining the Blues for £32million from Paris Saint-Germain on deadline day.
Liverpool make two changes as Roberto Firmino is ruled out with a groin problem as he is replaced by Brazilian compatriot Philippe Coutinho.
Meanwhile Dejan Lovren returns to the defence in place of Lucas.
Courtois, Ivanovic, Cahill, David Luiz, Azpilicueta, Kante, Willian, Oscar, Matic, Hazard, Costa.
Mignolet, Clyne, Matip, Lovren, Milner, Henderson, Wijnaldum, Lallana, Coutinho, Mane, Sturridge.
DOMINIC KING: It turns out this wasn't the plan. Had things gone as Roberto Firmino expected when he began chasing his dream in the Brazilian beach city of Maceio, fame and fortune would have come at the other end of the pitch.
'I started out as a defender,' says Firmino, the current spearhead of Liverpool's team and a man who is becoming one of the Premier League's most talked about forwards. 'I played as a full-back and then I moved into the centre. I played defence right the way through until the Under 18s. Honestly!'
Although that's rather harsh to suggest Liverpool have come to defend. In fact I fancy Jurgen Klopp's side will have a good eye on attacking Chelsea this evening, especially with John Terry ruled out for the Blues.
Either way here is the Liverpool team bus pulling up at Stamford Bridge.
I'm informed that there are new lighting machines pitch side at Stamford Bridge, which will be used for decorative purposes as the teams make their way out.
All I know for now is they don't look waterproof judging by their plastic casing in place as the playing surface is soaked - unless that's their design.
We are still half an hour away from when the starting line-ups are expected to drop, but Liverpool could be without Roberto Firmino in the starting line-up, with the forward carrying a minor problem.
The Brazilian has travelled to Stamford Bridge but is now expected to miss out on the XI.
You've got a whole weekend to look forward to, so why not start it off with action from arguably the biggest match of the Premier League fixtures from matchday five as Chelsea host Liverpool at Stamford Bridge?
David Luiz is set to start for the first time since re-signing for the Blues on deadline day, so follow Sportsmail's coverage of all the action as it happens. Good evening to you all.
It's an early start to the Premier League weekend but it's by no means a low key one as heavyweights Chelsea and Liverpool get the action underway at Stamford Bridge on Friday night.
David Luiz is set to make his first appearance for the Blues since rejoining the club from Paris Saint-Germain on deadline day, taking the place of John Terry who picked up an injury in Sunday's 2-2 draw at Swansea City.
Liverpool go into the west London meeting high on confidence having hammered champions Leicester City 4-1 on Saturday. Follow all the action as it happens