Use the RANK function to compare numbers to other numbers
in the same list. Watch the videos, and get the free RANK workbook
Use the RANK function to compare numbers to other numbers
in the same list. See the steps in this video, and the written instructions
are below the video.
Your browser can't show this frame. Here is a link to the page
If you give the RANK function a number, and a list of numbers, it
will tell you the rank of that number in the list, either in ascending
or descending order.
For example, in the screen shot below, there is a list of 10 student
test scores, in cells B2:B11.
To find the rank of the the first student's score in cell B2, enter
this formula in cell C2:
Then, copy the formula from cell C2 down to cell C11, and the scores
will be ranked in descending order.
There are 3 arguments for the RANK function:
What happens to the ranking if some of the scores are tied? Excel will skip subsequent numbers, if necessary, to show the correct rank.
If you have to break the ties, or award prize money based on ties, there are examples below.
In some cases, ties aren't allowed, so you have to find a way to
break the tie.
Watch this video to see the steps, and the written instructions are
below the video.
Your browser can't show this frame. Here is a link to the page
In some cases, ties aren't allowed, so you have to find a way to
break the tie.
In this example, you could keep track of the number of minutes that
each student worked on the test, and use that time to break any ties.
If scores are tied, the student who takes less time to complete the
test will rank ahead of the other student with the same score.
I added the Test Times in column C, and a TieBreak formula in column
The Tie Break formula uses COUNTIF and RANK functions, wrapped with
an IF function, to see if a tie breaking decimal amount should be
added to the original Rank.
After calculating the tie breaking decimal amounts, you can add the
RANK function results to the TieBreak results, to get the final ranking.
In this example, two students were tied in 4th place. Joe took 27
minutes to complete the test, and his Time was ranked 5th. Ivy took
29 minutes to complete the test, and her Time was ranked 9th.
The Tie Break formula adds a decimal of 0.09 to Ivy's score, and
0.05 to Joe's score. In the final ranking, Joe, with 4.05 ranks higher
than Ivy, with 4.09.
In a tournament, instead of breaking the ties, you might want to
split the winnings among any tied players, if you're awarding a cash
prize, or points. To see the steps for splitting the winnings, watch
this short video. The written instructions are below the video.
Your browser can't show this frame. Here is a link to the page
In a tournament, instead of breaking the ties, you might want to
split the winnings among any tied players, if you're awarding a cash
prize, or points. If 2 or more players have the same rank, they split
the prize amount available for that rank, down to the next occupied
Below is a sample prize table, showing the amount awarded for each
rank. In this example, if 3 players are at rank 1, they would split
the total amount (10+9+8=27) for ranks 1, 2 and 3.
Each of the 3 players at rank 1 earns 9 (27/3 = 9) and the player
with the next highest score would be ranked 4th, and earn 7.
To split the prize amount among tied players, the Prize formula uses
the AVERAGE function, with the OFFSET function finding the range of
cells to average.This formula is entered in cell D2 and copied down
to cell D11.
The Prize formula uses the AVERAGE function, with the OFFSET function
finding the range of cells to average.
Download the zipped sample Excel
RANK Function file