Your Six-Time Champion MKE Wave has announced a Guaranteed Fun Policy for remaining MKE Wave games at UW-Milwaukee Panther Arena!
"We have an amazing, one of a kind, product and we need to wake Milwaukee up to it,” said MKE Wave VP of Sales / Marketing Joe Zimmerman. “Stadium Journey Magazine just did a review and said "it's a must see for any sports enthusiast". The new Wave is truly a fun experience. We are hopeful that this will start to awaken this city to give us a shot."
For the complete set of rules please click here.
The MKE Wave take on the arch-rival Chicago Mustangs, Saturday, January 10th, 6:05pm at UW-Milwaukee Panther Arena.
WE HATE CHICAGO GAME:There is a thin line between love and hate and it’s called the Wisconsin/Illinois State Line. Its not that we hate Chicago we just think they are beneath us, well in fact, they are! So hold onto your toll money and come celebrate our love for the WAVE by showing how much we dislike da bears, cubs, sox, bulls and the Chicago Mustangs
GET OUTRAGEOUS ZONE (between Sections 206-210) features…MKE Wave Merchandise Stand… where you can purchase new MKE Wave Jerseys, T-shirts, hats and more! Don’t forget to pick up a #14 Brett Wiesner Memorial Armband with proceeds going to the Brett Wiesner Summer Soccer Camp Scholarship Program!
ENTER TO WIN!All Inclusive Funjet Vacations getaway for two to a warm tropical destination. (Drop part of your ticket stub at the door when you come into UW-Milwaukee Panther Arena.)-50 inch flat panel TV courtesy of ABC Audio Video.-Dewalt Tool Package (valued at $750) from Professional Construction Inc.-Also visit our friends from the U.S. Army, Gruber Law Offices, Reina International Autos, Guardian Credit Union, Drench Fitness Boutique, Prescott Miller Jewelers and Vitality Health and Wellness for even more goodies!
ON-FIELD GAMES. We need contestants for....-Wisco Bed Race, win an overnight stay at ANY Wisco Group Hotel.-Steinhafels Mattress Roll, where you can win a Dream Mattress courtesy of Steinhafels.-Reina Tight Pants Dance Contest, wear your tight pants, shake your booty and qualify to be a finalist for a brand new 2014 Vespa Scooter from Reina International Autos in Brookfield.-Swimtastic Bubble Blow, win a $25 MKE Wave Merchandise Gift Card.-Sudz Bucket Race - $30 and $25 Gift Certificates to Sudz Wash & Lube.-Miller Keg Race – A case of Miller Lite.
KIDS INTERACTIVE ZONE! (Between Sections 226 – 228)Mini Soccer for the little ones! The turf is down, the goals are set… how many goals are you gonna score? Visit the Grafe Imagination Station where your kids can play and create with building blocks and more!
POST GAME AUTOGRAPH SESSION!After most games this season you’ll be able to come on field and meet the entire MKE Wave Team during the POST GAME AUTOGRAPH SESSION! Fans can enter the field after the game via the SW Corner of UW-Milwaukee Panther Arena. Ask any usher or MKE Wave representative for more information!
TICKETS:Single-Game Tickets are on sale now at all Ticketmaster Outlets, by phone at 800.745.3000, online at Ticketmaster.com and at the Milwaukee Theatre / UW-Milwaukee Panther Arena Box Office at 510 W. Kilbourn Ave. Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 53203.
Season, Group, Flex 10 and 1,2 & 3 Game ticket packages are available by calling 414.224.WAVE (9283) or click here.
2014-2015 MKE Wave Regular Season Schedule:Road Opener: Saturday, November 8th – 7:35pm - at St. Louis Ambush – The Family Arena (WIN 8-4)Saturday, November 15th – 7:05pm - Missouri Comets – Independence Events Center (LOSS 7-9)Saturday, November 22nd – 6:05pm -  at Detroit Waza Flo – Melvindale Arena (WIN 4-0)Friday, November 28th – 7:35pm - at St. Louis Ambush – The Family Arena (WIN 8-4)Saturday, November 29th – 7:05pm - at Chicago Mustangs – Sears Center (LOSS 4-5)Home Opener: Saturday, December 6th – 6:05pm – vs. St. Louis Ambush – UW-Milwaukee Panther Arena (WIN 9-3)Friday, December 12th – 6:35pm - at Baltimore Blast – Royal Farms Arena (LOSS 8-13)Saturday, December 13th – 6:35pm - at Baltimore Blast – Royal Farms Arena (LOSS 10-14)Saturday, December 20th – 1:05pm - vs. Tulsa Revolution - UW Milwaukee Panther Arena (WIN 9-3)Saturday, December 27th – 1:05pm - vs. Detroit Waza Flo - UW Milwaukee Panther Arena (WIN 8-6)Wednesday, December 31st – 3:05pm - vs. Missouri Comets - UW Milwaukee Panther Arena (LOSS 7-8 / OT)Saturday, January 3rd – 6:05pm - vs. Rochester Lancers - UW Milwaukee Panther Arena (WIN 7-4)Saturday, January 10th – 6:05pm - vs. Chicago Mustangs - UW Milwaukee Panther ArenaFriday, January 16th – 7:05pm - vs. Baltimore Blast - UW Milwaukee Panther ArenaSaturday, January 24th – 6:05pm - at Detroit Waza Flo – Melvindale ArenaSunday, January 25th – 3:05pm - vs. Wichita B-52’s - UW Milwaukee Panther ArenaFriday, February 6th – 7:35pm - at Tulsa Revolution – Cox Business CenterSaturday, February 7th – 7:05pm - at Wichita B-52’s – Hartman ArenaSaturday, February 14th – 1:05pm - vs. Syracuse Silver Knights - UW Milwaukee Panther ArenaSaturday, February 21st – 6:05pm - vs. Detroit Waza Flo - UW Milwaukee Panther Arena
Milwaukee Wave:From its humble beginnings in 1984, the Milwaukee Wave has evolved and grown to be a national success with 6 championships and a leader in community outreach. As the oldest continuously operating professional soccer team in North America, the Milwaukee Wave has had the unique ability to make a positive impact in their community while carrying on their reputation as a winning team.  The evolution of the Milwaukee Wave can be traced from its conception to present day by taking a look at the major turning points throughout the team’s 30-year history. MilwaukeeWave.com for more.
MKE Sports & Entertainment:MKE Sports & Entertainment owns and operates professional sports team, sports complexes, and other entertainment entities in the Midwest including The Rock Sports Complex in Milwaukee, the Milwaukee Wave Professional Soccer Team playing in the Major Arena Soccer League, the Rockford Aviators Baseball team (Rockford, IL) playing in the Frontier League and the Kokomo Jackrabbits Baseball team (Kokomo, Indiana) playing in the Prospect League. For even more information about MKE Sports & Entertainment and everything we do visit MKESports.com
Major Arena Soccer League (MASL):The Major Arena Soccer League (MASL) is the top level of arena soccer in North America. The league was known as the Professional Arena Soccer League when it began play on October 25, 2008. The circuit concluded its sixth season with the Chicago Mustangs claiming the Newman Cup on March 16. On May 19, 2014 the league was reintroduced as the MASL with 24 teams in the US and Mexico. The Premier Arena Soccer League (PASL-Premier) just concluded its 16th season as the nation's top amateur arena soccer league and is the official developmental league of the MASL. Both the MASL and PASL-Premier are members of Confederacion Panamerica de Minifutbol (CPM).