Leeds United live score (and video online live stream*), team roster with season schedule and results.'
Leeds United is playing next match on 20. Nov 2016 against Newcastle United in Championship.
When the match starts, you will be able to follow
Leeds United v Newcastle United live score
standings, minute by minute updated live results and match statistics. We may have video highlights with goals and
news for some Leeds United matches, but only if they play their match in one of the most popular football leagues.
Leeds United previous match was against Norwich City in Championship, match ended with result 2 - 3
(Leeds United won the match).
Leeds United fixtures tab is showing last 100 football matches with statistics and
win/draw/lose icons. There are also all Leeds United scheduled matches that they are going to play in the future.
Leeds United performance & form graph is SofaScore
Football livescore
unique algorithm that we are generating from team’s last 10 matches, statistics, detailed analysis and our own
knowledge. This graph may help you to bet on Leeds United matches, but be aware of that SofaScore LiveScore accepts
no responsibility or liability for any financial or other loss, be it direct or indirect, as a result of any
action reliant on any of this website’s content.
In match details we offer link to watch online
Leeds United Newcastle United live stream
sponsored by bet365. If this match is covered by bet365 live streaming you can watch Leeds United Newcastle United
on your PC and on mobile - iPhone, iPad, Android or Windows phone.
Please note that
the intellectual property rights to stream such events are usually owned at a country level and therefore,
depending on your location, there may be certain events that you may be unable to view due to such restrictions.
Current Leeds United squad is:
Forwards: Souleymane Doukara, Chris Wood, Marcus Antonsson, Hadi Sacko
Midfilders: Kalvin Phillips, Stuart Dallas, Luke Murphy, Alex Mowatt, Toumani Diagouraga, Ronaldo Vieira, Matt Grimes, Kemar Roofe, Pablo Hernandez, Liam Bridcutt, Eunan O'Kane
Defenders: Liam Cooper, Gaetano Berardi, Charlie Taylor, Lewie Coyle, Kyle Bartley, Tyler Denton, Luke Ayling, Pontus Jansson
Goalkeepers: Ross Turnbull, Bailey Peacock-Farrell, Robert Green, Marco Silvestri
You can click on any player from the roster on the right and see his personal information such as nationality,
date of birth, height, preferred foot, position, player value, transfer history etc. There are also statistics
for each player in all competitions with all total played and started matches, minutes played, number of goals
scored, number of cards and much more. Leeds United top scorers list is updated live during every match.
SofaScore
football livescore
is available as iPhone and iPad app, Android app on Google Play and Windows phone app.
You can find us in all stores on different languages searching for "SofaScore". Install SofaScore app and
follow all Leeds United matches live on your mobile!