Kristy Althaus finished as the runner-up in the 2012 Miss Colorado Teen USA beauty pageant, but today all records of her involvement in the competition are gone after word circulated that she appeared in an adult movie.
Her name and likeness have been removed from the site, along with mentions of her in the competition, after it was revealed that Kristy appeared in an adult movie shortly after turning 18.
The gossip website Gawker published before and after versions of the site, showing that Kristy Althaus appeared to be gone from the site entirely. A YouTube video of the 2012 pageant showing her on stage with the eventual winner have also been removed.
Though it has not been confirmed that it was Althaus appearing in the video, which has since circulated on the internet, several people close to the pageant have confirmed privately that she was involved.
Shortly after the report surfaced, Kristy Althaus took down her Twitter page, though some of her archived tweets may show references to the brewing scandal.
“Trust is like an eraser, it gets smaller with every mistake you make,” she wrote, adding “There’s three ways to do things… the right way, the wrong way and the way I do it.”
This is not the first scandal to hit teen beauty pageants. Late last year a Temecula, California, teen plead guilty in federal court to hacking the computer of the recently crowned Miss Teen USA and using her webcam to take naked photographs. He then tried to use the pictures to extort her.
Other contestants have gotten into trouble themselves. In 2006, Miss Nevada Katie Rees had her title taken away after racy pictures appeared online, and Miss California USA Carrie Prejean was also fired in 2009 after a private sex tape surfaced.
When it comes to badly behaving contestants themselves, expert Roger Neal thinks the behavior may be calculated.
“The pageant these days seems to like controversy,” said Neal, a rep who has worked closely with the Miss USA and Miss Teen USA branches.”And the girls (who participate) often see examples daily of reality stars being rewarded for bad behavior, so they figure if they act badly, they will be stars too.”
Kristy Althaus has not spoken publicly about the adult film scandal, and neither has the Miss Teen Colorado USA organization.