Windows 10 (reviewed) became available on 29 July 2015 and was followed by the free Anniversary Update on 2 August 2016. The next big Windows 10 update is the Creators update, scheduled to arrive in Spring 2017. Here's how to re-watch the Creators update live stream, and your complete guide to Windows 10.
Also see: Surface Pro 5 | Surface 4 | Surface PC | Surface Book 2 | Surface Phone
Update 2 November 2016: Windows 10 will soon be the only option for new PCs, with Microsoft stopping sales of Windows 7 Pro and Windows 8.1 to PC makers on 31 October. OEMs can still use up any licences they may still hold, but once they run out it will be Windows 10 or Windows 10.
Microsoft has been working on the next big update to Windows 10 for some time and it was revealed on 26 October 2016, through the Creators update. We expect the update to come out in March 2017 - but at the time of writing, we haven't got the exact date.
At the 26 October event, Microsoft announced a flurry of new features in its upcoming Creators update, which is set to be available in Spring 2017. Here is a look at the main features to look forward to:
3D content was a focus for Microsoft, with Windows 10 focusing greater on 3D content, which spans to Paint and Powerpoint too! And yes, Paint got a fresh lick of paint - pun intended.
You can now create 3D shapes in Paint and share them directly with your social followers, or SketchUp network - better still, print them directly on your 3D printers, nifty.
Following on from 3D content, comes VR headsets - Microsoft announced their partnership with partners, to create a cheaper VR headset which starts at an affordable $299 (~£250) - there's not much more info shared on this, but we presume they'll provide a good VR experience with Windows 10 devices.
Watch out Twitch, Microsoft are out to get you! With the Creators update, you'll be able to set up a live stream using Beam. You will be able to interact with users easily and will also be able to create tournaments with friends!
This might seem trivial to some, but to others will be extremely useful. You will now have the option to pin 'people' to the taskbar, enabling you to quickly drag and drop files to your contacts, by taking these files to the taskbar!
Anniversary Update: Available from the Settings > Update and SecurityCreators update: Available to Windows Insiders in October 2016
Assuming you are already running Windows 10, to run the Windows 10 Anniversary Update or the Creators update you'll need a PC with 2GB of RAM and 20GB of internal storage (that's for 64-bit, for 32-bit you'll need 16GB). The desktop version will run on devices with screens larger than 7in, while the mobile version works with devices that have screens up to 9in.
The Anniversary Update has been available since 2 August, but you will need to have automatic updates turned on to receive it. Go to Start, Settings, Update and Security and turn on automatic updates. The Creators update will be available in the same place, but will be available in Spring 2017 - however Windows Insiders will be available to try the beta from October 2016.
(You can also manually check for the an update by going to Start, Settings, Update and Security, Check for Updates.)
You can also download the Anniversary Update (and in Spring 2017, the Creators update) and manually install it. Provided you have at least 4GB of space on a USB drive, portable hard drive or DVD, download the tool from here. Choose Create installation media for another PC, then select the language, edition and whether you want 32- or 64-bit. Save the file to a bootable USB drive or as an ISO; if you choose ISO you can then burn it to disc. Boot up the software and follow the wizard to install the Windows 10 update.
The Creators update follows the Anniversary Update as a free update to Windows 10 users. The Anniversary Update included improvements to Cortana, Windows Hello and Ink, and is possibly the best known of all Windows 10 updates, but it's not the only update Windows 10 has received following its release.
Since the beginning, Windows 10 has had its fair share of teething troubles, with some people claiming Microsoft launched an unfinished product too early just to hit a deadline. Whether true or not, Windows 10 is different from previous versions of the operating system: it's now a service rather than a standalone piece of software, and runs across multiple platforms. In practice, that means it will be getting regular updates and changing over time.
Think of it more like Google's Chrome web browser: you don't worry about which version you're running. Instead automatic updates bring improvements and new features regularly. So it is for Windows 10; we won't be be waiting for a Windows 11 - we might instead have to get used to calling it simply "Windows".
Until 29 July 2016 Windows 10 was a free upgrade from Windows 7 and Windows 8, though you had to pay to upgrade from XP or Vista. Those prices are now applicable to all users, with Windows 10 Home costing £99.99 and Windows 10 Pro £189.99, both from Microsoft's online store.
Once you're on Windows 10, the updates are free - this includes the Anniversary and Creators updates. See also: How to upgrade from Windows XP to Windows 10.
Microsoft’s special event took place on 26 October 2016. You can watch a live stream on Microsoft's website, which is also embedded at the bottom of this page too.
Should anything go wrong with the feed, follow our Microsoft event live blog below for real-time announcements and expert analysis.
// <![CDATA[
Livefyre.require(["app-embed#0.7.0"], function (appEmbed) {appEmbed.loadAll().done(function(embed) {embed = embed[0];if (embed.el.onload && embed.getConfig) {embed.el.onload(embed.getConfig());}});});
// ]]>