Four days after the FA Cup delivered its 24 hours of underdog heaven, the Capital One Cup stepped forward with an incredible late comeback as Sheffield United pushed Tottenham to the edge.
Spurs are on their way to Wembley with an Argentine at the controls and Chas 'n' Dave will be tuning up thanks to two goals from Christian Eriksen but this was mighty close after two goals in 140 seconds from teenage substitute Che Adams.
Well there is the Capital One Cup final complete as Chelsea take on Tottenham in a repeat of the 2008 final which Spurs won 2-1.
Will Chelsea get revenge for that defeat? Or will Spurs upset the odds once again at Wembley.
We will have to wait until March 1 ,but for now that's all from me. Thanks for following and cheerio.
But not without one almighty scare! Sheffield United so nearly pulled off a sensational upset, but Christian Eriksen's late heroics once again bail out Tottenham.
The Spurs players celebrate in a relieved fashion on the pitch as they unveil banners reading that they are in the final - as Spurs fans remind the players they are on the way to Wembley with some help from Chas n' Dave lyrics.
Here's @ericdier celebrating with our fans. We're on our way to Wembley. #COYS pic.twitter.com/t7yQYxAoXJ
Tottenham Hotspur are through to the Capital One Cup final
90+3min: It's all boiled over at Bramall Lane! The chance is on for Sheffield United as Chris Basham is played in on goal but as he leads with his feet to reach the ball, he only catches Vorm's face who bravely rushed off his line.
Play is stopped and the Blades player is booked as handbags are exchanged between the players.
90+1min: Final change for Tottenham as Danny Rose replaces Mason. We are now in four added minutes.
88min: What a cup tie! Out of nowhere Spurs retake the aggregate lead! The Blades throw too many players forward and as Kane releases Christian Eriksen in on goal, the Dane keeps his cool to slot an ever so calm finish across the target and into the bottom corner. Devastatsing for the Blades but can they come back again?
3 - Sheffield United have not scored three goals in a League Cup game since August 2008. Target.
85min: Inches away from a Sheffield United lead - just inches! Spurs are being carved into ribbons now and a through ball finds Reed inside the box, who drives just narrowly over the crossbar.
83min: And now seems the perfect time to remind you that away goals do count but only AFTER extra time. An additioanl 30 minutes is where we are heading at the moment unless the Blades can find a winner - and the League One side are well on top now.
80min: Scenes! Tottenham capitulate again and Che Adams is in absolute dreamland as his effort inside the box following a cross deflects off Eric Dier and past a helpless Michel Vorm. This cup sure knows how to throw up drama!
77min: Game on! Clough has played a blinder! Che Adams has only just come on and his first act is to steer home a low cross at the back post.
74min: Changes again for both teams as Townsend replaces the impressive Lamela for Spurs.
Nigel Clough has gone with a double switch though as McNulty and Campbell-Ryce are replaced by Michael Higdon and Che Adams.
72min: There is still hope for Sheffield United despite the gaps they are starting to leave open at the back. Andros Townsend is warming up for Spurs.
69min: What a chance to wrap up the game for Spurs! Lamela leads a counter attack and threads a perfect through pass for Mason inside the box.
The midfielder looks certain to score but Baxter of all people cuts across to slide the ball wide. As a bonus for the Blades, a goal kick is given.
68min: How many more attacking free-kicks do Sheffield United want to give Spurs? Now Lamela is brought down 30 yards out, but this time Kane takes over set-piece duties, only to give Howard an easy save with a shot lacking power.
65min: Changes for both teams then. It's not Soldado replacing Dembele, but Paulinho to help shore up the Spurs midfield
Louis Reed comes on in favour of Michael Doyle for the home side.
64min: Spurs' best chances have come from free-kicks, and they win another on the edge of the Blades box after Mason is brought down following a clumsy challenge from Flynn - who escapes another yellow card for that tackle having already been booked.
62min: There is some action down on the Tottenham bench. Dembele is limping around Bramall Lane and Roberto Soldado is starting a brisk warm up.
Still the Blades press for an equaliser on the night as McNulty drags well wide from 25 yards. The home fans are sticking with this though - they sense a breakthrough is coming.
59min: But now it's the Blades who have to be wary of the Spurs counter as Ryan Flynn is booked for tripping Dembele - Spurs are down to 10 briefly as the midfielder receives treatment on the touchline.
58min: This is by far Sheffield United's best spell. They are attacking Spurs down both flanks now as Campbell-Ryce's latest cross is cleared for a throw in.
Just as importantly it's giving the home fans belief, as the locals once again find their voices to cheer on their side.
55min: Chance for Sheffield United now as Dembele is booked out in an advanced position down the Blades' left flank for a trip.
The resulting free-kick is played to the edge of the box, where Jose Baxter's powerful low drive is blocked clear.
53min: Smart stop from Howard. As Kane charges forward under pressure, his low powerful drive is straight at the Sheffield United keeper from 20 yards - who saves assuringly.
51min: It's snowing again at Bramall Lane and Campbell-Ryce continues to try and cause panic in the Spurs box with high lofted crosses for Vorm to deal with. His latest though fails to find anyone as Spurs collect at the back post to clear their lines.
48min: Spurs nearly pretty much put the tie to bed in the opening seconds of the second half, but Kane can only shoot wide of the near post from eight yards.
Shortly after, Mason is booked for a late sliding challenge on Stefan Scougall.
Part of Tottenham's success is down to the way they have controlled the midfield, and Benji Stambouli has been central to that.
The summer signing has been a fringe player for Spurs but he has impressed so far this evening in stopping the Blades playing. Here's his on-the-ball heat map from the first half.
Because they are struggling against a Tottenham team who have impressed and deservedly lead at the break thanks to a wonderful Christian Eriksen free-kick.
There are positives for the hosts though. Spurs look a little lost creating chances from open play, and one Blades goal in the second-half will dramatically turn around the mood inside the stadium. This is far from over folks...
'Mood well and truly punctured by Eriksen’s goal. Bramall Lane deflated. They need a sign soon to offer hope that all is not lost.'
45min: Sheffield United are not learning lessons here. They give away another free-kick in a similar position to where Eriksen scored from after Doyle chops down Mason to pick up a yellow card.
This time however, the Danes' effort strikes the wall as one additional minute is added on.
42min: Good try. Sheffield United would have had this in their gameplan as they counter attack down the right wing, but as the ball is squared for McNulty 25 yards out, he controls the ball in the air before firing just wide across goal. Vorm looked like he had it covered, however.
39min: Tottenham are dominating the game now and Nigel Clough will be hoping half-time comes sooner rather than later. Mousa Dembele in typical fashion fends off all challenges near the Blades box before cutting back for Mason.
The midfielder has a sight of goal from 20 yards but scuffs badly and shoots well wide of the target.
36min: Spurs have looked in control since taking the lead but as snow starts to fall again, Sheffield United win a free-kick in the Tottenham half after Kyle Walker is booked for a trip on Murphy.
17 - Tottenham have now scored in 17 of their last 18 League Cup semi-final games. Inevitable.
'Chas n Dave are tuning up the old Joanna. Spurs are on their way to Wembley, according to the fans in the Bramall Lane end.'
31min: Spurs fans are singing about going to Wembley now, but it's not over just yet.
Sheffield United now need to score twice in 90 minutes and three times in 120 minutes to progress, but that goal also means this game now cannot go to penalties with Spurs also leading on away goals.
28min: Spurs couldn't create a chance, so they had one given to them after Benji Stambouli was brought down for a free-kick 25 yards out.
That's not the thing Sheffield United should be doing with Christian Eriksen on the pitch, and the Dane showed them why with a quite stunning strike across goal and into the top corner. Howard wasn't going to save that in a month of Sundays.
25min: This is poised like a chess match. Spurs have all the ball and given the lack of Sheffield United pressing, the Blades look happy to let the visitors have it.
Tottenham are only creating half-chances though, as Kane fires wide at the near post from an acute angle after bursting inside the box.
22min: Interesting effort from Ryan Mason, who catches Howard off guard with a 40-yard drive that bounces in front of the Blades keeper, forcing him to parry the shot.
Fortunately for the League One side, it's a well controlled save and the keeper collects with ease at the second attempt. Good vision there from Mason - it was the last thing just about anyone would thought he would do - but well worth having a pop.
19min: Now the Blades are getting caught cold at the back! Spurs intercept a pass in midfield but despite breaking forward with Harry Kane, the striker shoots wide of the near post with better options to cross to inside the box.
Moments before Mousa Dembele struck wide with a dragged effort from 25 yards. Spurs looking strong at this phase of the game.
16min: Michel Vorm aside, it's been a cautious but confident opening from Tottenham and they look up for this Sheffield United test as they once again retake control of possession.
So far so good, but how will they fare when the Blades quest for a goal this evening becomes a matter of urgency?
13min: Now Spurs have a chance to take the lead but from the edge of the box Harry Kane can only fire straight at Mark Howard in the Blades goal.
10min: Brilliant chance for Sheffield United! It's zero to hero stuff from Michel Vorm, who comes to collect a high cross in the box, only to fumble the ball upon collecting it.
The ball falls loose for Jamie Murphy, but his shot on goal is then superbly parried by the Spurs keeper.
9min: Tottenham win their first corner - but set-pieces are going to have to be better than that from Lamela - much better.
The Argentine curls a lofted cross into the box but it's nowhere near a yellow shirt and the Blades head clear.
6min: But Sheffield United respond by enjoying their first spell on the ball. The Blades are looking to find Marc McNulty with long balls down the flank - but still no chances as the teams continue to spar.
3min: Surprisingly, it's a rather low key opening - but credit goes to Tottenham who have immediately tried to take the sting out the game by playing slow possession football.
Spurs have the first half chance though. Harry Kane's low cross is cleared from the right after he cut inside, before Erik Lamela curled way off target from the edge of the box a few moments later.
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more
Tottenham's first XI for the Capital One Cup semi-final second leg at Sheffield United shows two adjustments from last week's initial encounter.
Andros Townsend - who had netted the only goal in Spurs' 1-0 first leg victory - and Emmanuel Adebayor drop to the bench, with Mousa Dembele and Erik Lamela coming into the starting line-up.
The sole change for the Sky Bet League One hosts from the game at White Hart Lane sees Jose Baxter replacing the benched Louis Reed.
3 - Nigel Clough has lost just three of 21 cup games as Sheffield United manager. Pedigree.
Tottenham have just the one striker starting tonight, but it's their main one in Harry Kane who is looking to fire Spurs into the final.
The academy product failed to find the target in the first leg, but proved busy during his time on the pitch as his heat map shows. Will he be as productive playing as a lone striker this evening?
For sure stranger things have happened, and given how much of a mess Spurs can get into in defence - the Blades could do it with style too.
Spurs have threats in attack so are capable of scoring, but Coral are offering 33/1 on the League One side to win 3-1 this evening after 90 mins.
And warm up they will need to because it's a very cold in Sheffield  - in fact snow is falling as the players begin their pre-match preparations.
You would fancy these conditions will suit the League One side, or am I just generalising Spurs as a southern softies side?
Tottenham have already been surprisingly dumped out the FA Cup at home by Leicester this week, and Nigel Clough has warned there is more to come.
The Sheffield United boss claims Premier League teams don't take cup competitions seriously enough and that Spurs are there for the taking.
...but only because he wants his Chelsea side to gain revenge for their 5-3 defeat at White Hart Lane earlier this month.
Well that's the official line, in reality he probably just doesn't fancy facing taking on another League One team following the pasting Bradford gave Chelsea on Saturday in the FA Cup.
Sheffield United: Howard, Harris, Basham, Flynn, Doyle, Murphy, McEveley Scougall, Baxter, McNulty, Campbell-Ryce.Subs: Alcock, Higdon, Reed, Turner, Kennedy, Adams, Wallace
Tottenham: Vorm, Walker, Dier, Vertonghen, Davies, Mason, Stambouli, Lamela, Dembele, Eriksen, Kane.Subs: Friedel, Fazio, Rose, Paulinho, Townsend, Adebayor, Soldado
Here it is, the official teamsheet for tonight's @CapitalOne_Cup SF 2nd leg v @SpursOfficial... #twitterblades pic.twitter.com/fPLaSCZNju
Vorm, Walker, Dier, Vertonghen, Davies, Mason, Stambouli, Lamela, Dembele, Eriksen, Kane.
Plenty at stake at Bramall Lane - a day out in a major cup final at Wembley no less.
Chelsea will be the opposition in the final following their 2-1 aggregate win over Liverpool last night and you can click on the above link to be reminded of how the Blues reached a Wembley date on March 1.
Team news coming shortly. We'll be in our yellow third kit this evening. #COYS pic.twitter.com/9mMuQbepTy
Mauricio Pochettino has been urged by Tottenham legend Ossie Ardiles to play his strongest team for tonight's clash.
An FA Cup winner with Spurs in 1981, Ardiles revealed he has already told Pochettino about the importance of the being in a cup final.
'I believe Tottenham should play with the A-Team. We are one step from Wembley,' he told talkSPORT.
'Mauricio Pochettino certainly knows the importance of Wembley and the importance of being in a final, so I hope he will play the best team and I hope we have a very good result.'
Will Ossie get his wish? We will find out very shortly when the team news drops.
Tottenham lead this cup tie by just the one goal going into the second leg at Bramall Lane, courtesy of Andros Townsend's penalty kick in the White Hart Lane encounter.
Spurs would have hoped to build a bigger lead heading into the second leg, but as it is this semi-final is set-up rather nicely, with the Blades set to take the game to the Premier League team.
Click on the above link for the full match report from the first leg.
I mean the trophy and not the pennant of course...
Come on you Spurssss! #COYS pic.twitter.com/8nGkufH0ZJ
What a stunning game that was last night between Chelsea and Liverpool, even including the dark arts of Diego Costa, and guess what, we have more semi-final drama in the Capital One Cup this evening!
This time we have an upset on the cards as Tottenham Hotspur travel to Sheffield United of League One in the teams' second leg clash at Bramall Lane.
So good evening to you all and welcome to our live coverage. It should be a cracker!
Follow Sportsmail's coverage of the Capital One Cup as Sheffield United host Tottenham at Bramall Lane in the second leg of their semi-final.
Spurs hold a 1-0 lead from a first leg White Hart Lane win, but having been dumped out the FA Cup by Leicester on Saturday go into the match vulnerable to an upset at the League One outfit
The Blades have a strong record in cup competitions against Premier League teams and will hope to pull off a memorable win and book a Wembley final against Chelsea on March 1.