To many, he was an entertainer masquerading
as a golfer. But those who
know the sport know that Juan “Chi Chi”
Rodriguez was, and is, much more than
Famed for his “sword act,” where he
pretended to be a matador slaying a bull with
his putter after making a birdie, Rodriguez was
also one of golf’s consummate shotmakers,
contorting his body after the shot in ways
that would make today’s high-priced swing
gurus cringe. Yet, time after time, the ball
would find its target, and Rodriguez found
his way into the winner’s circle eight times
on the PGA Tour and another 22 times on
the Champions Tour. His achievements
landed him into the World Golf Hall of Fame
in 1992.
Rodriguez was born October 23, 1935,
in Rio Pledras, Puerto Rico, to a poor family.
Young Juan almost didn’t make it out of
childhood, as he suffered from rickets and
tropical sprue, a disease where the body fails to properly absorb
the nutrients from food, and is also characterized by diarrhea and
loss of appetite. He, of course, recovered in time, and eventually
went to work helping his father in the sugar cane fields. His father
never made more than $18 a week, and Juan dreamed of finding
a better way.
One day he wandered by a golf course, and saw that the
caddies were making more money by carrying a golf bag around
than he was working in the sugar cane fields. He soon got work
as a caddy at the ripe old age of eight, and eventually was able to
play the game himself. Showing a natural aptitude, Juan played
whenever he could, and often would belt a rolled-up tin can when he didn’t have a golf ball available.
Golf wasn’t the only sport in which Juan
participated. He engaged in boxing for sodas, and in
his teenage years was a baseball player who was good
enough to play alongside the likes of Juan Pizzaro,
Orlando Cepeda and Roberto Clemente. Before this,
Juan played ball with a player named Chi Chi Flores,
whom he greatly admired. In fact, he admired him so
much that by age 12 Juan was no longer Juan – he had
become Chi Chi Rodriguez.
Rodriguez says by the age of 18 he could pitch the
ball almost 100 miles per hour, but when he entered
the Army, he had to choose only one sport to play
and he chose golf, because he figured he could play
it for a lifetime. It was a smart move, because by this
time Rodriguez had become very proficient at golf. In
fact, the year before he entered the Army, he finished
second in the Puerto Rican Open.
After his stint in the Army, Rodriguez returned to
caddying and playing golf. His play drew the attention
of many people. In 1960, Rodriquez was fronted
$12,000 by one of the owners of the Dorado Beach
Resort, Laurence Rockefeller, and Rodriguez headed
to the PGA Tour. He won $450 in his first event and
never looked back. By contrast, Jack Nicklaus won
just $33.33 in his first attempt as a professional.
The origin of Rodriguez’s sword act was borne out of
another bit of showmanship. One time during his caddy
days, he made a putt, but a toad jumped out of the hole,
along with the ball. He got the idea to throw his hat
over the hole in a joking attempt to make sure the ball
would never come out of the hole again, and he carried
this act to the Tour. The other pros complained that he
may be damaging the hole, so he had to do something
different if he wanted to play up to the galleries. Hence,
the sword act was born.
Rodriguez scored his first victory in 1963, the
Denver Open Invitational. In 1964 he won two
tournaments, the Lucky International Open at Harding
Park Golf Course in San Francisco, and the Western
Open at Beverly Country Club in Chicago. It was the
only year that Rodriguez won more than once.
In addition to his showmanship, Rodriguez endeared
himself to the galleries with his small stature
and swing. At 5-foot-7 and perhaps 130 lbs. in his prime, Rodriguez lashed at the ball with such fury that
he often lost his balance after impact. Even though he
was a good ballstriker, he was known primarily for his
wedge play. During the 1960s, by acclamation from his
fellow touring professionals, Rodriguez was considered
the best greenside bunker player, along with another
diminutive fellow named Gary Player.
In 1973, Rodriguez was
named to the United States
Ryder Cup team, and finished
with a record of 0-1-1. In the
match that was drawn, he
teamed with Lou Graham against
the powerhouse Great Britain/
Ireland team of Tony Jacklin and
Peter Oosterhuis in foursomes.
As the format was different back
then than it is today, Rodriguez
never participated in singles
competition.
From 1973, when he won
the Greater Greensboro Open
in North Carolina, six long years
passed before his next and final
victory. In 1979, Rodriguez
won the Tallahassee Open at Killearn Country Club, shooting
the lowest four-round total of
his career in relation to par,
19-under, at the age of 43.
Although he was never to win again on the regular
PGA Tour, Rodriguez, like many of his generation,
got a new lease on life when the PGA Senior Tour
was officially formed in 1980 as a result of the very
successful Legends of Golf tournament. Joining the
tour in 1983, Rodriguez went on to become one of
its most prolific winners, hoisting the championship
hardware 22 times, which remains tied for sixth on
the all-time list. He also won two senior majors, the
1986 Senior Players Championship and the 1997 PGA
Seniors Championship.
In 1991, he engaged in a playoff with Jack Nicklaus
for the US Senior Open title at Oakland Hills Country
Club in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, but not before
hitting one of the greatest shots in senior golf history.
Needing a birdie on the 72nd hole to force the playoff,
Rodriguez hit a long-iron approach from 200 yards that
rolled to within three feet of the hole for an easy birdie.
While Nicklaus won the playoff, Rodriquez famously
remarked that “The Bear crushed the Mouse today.”
All was not lost that year for Rodriguez, though, as he
had a career-best four victories.
His last win on the Senior Tour came in 1993 at
the age of 57 when he won the Bernet Senior Classic
at Bunker Hills Golf Course
in Coon Rapids, Minnesota.
Rodriguez continued to play
a full schedule on what was
now the Champions Tour until
2002. Starting in 2003 he played
fewer and fewer tournaments,
and in February of 2007 played
in his last event, the Allianz
Championship in Boca Raton,
Florida.
Rodriguez was feted with
many honors during his career
in addition to his Hall of Fame
induction. In 1989 the USGA
named him the Bob Jones
Award winner, in recognition
of distinguished sportsmanship
in golf. That same year, the
Golf Course Superintendents
Association of America gave
him its highest honor, the Old
Tom Morris Award.
After a brief meeting with the late Mother
Theresa, Rodriguez was determined to use his wealth
and influence to help others. He began the Chi Chi
Rodriguez foundation at the Glen Oaks Golf Course in
Clearwater, Florida, to aid troubled and disadvantaged
youths. Over 600 youngsters work on the golf course
each year, learning discipline and responsibility. For
his charitable work and helping of others, in 1994 he
was also elected into the World Humanitarian Sports
Hall of Fame.
Today, Rodriguez lives in retirement in Guayama,
Puerto Rico, with his wife, and only occasionally
plays golf. He is also a member of the WGTF’s Puerto
Rican Golf Teachers Federation, which is under the
leadership of his nephew, Rudy Martinez Rodriguez.