1. Why you were looking forward to going to the ground (or not as the case may be):
Living fairly locally to Ipswich this was quite a good opportunity to get to an away game. Preston  have been in good form recently and this would prove to be a very tricky tie against a team also doing well in the division above. I was not holding out much hope for the game, but it’s the FA Cup,  anything can happen.
2. How easy was your journey/finding the ground/car parking?
The ground isn’t too difficult to find. We came in on the A12 and followed it, closely approaching the town centre. You will eventually join quite a long traffic queue and the ground will be visible in the distance.
We parked in a nearby car park around five minutes from the ground, by the train station I think. It was nearby the Sir Bobby Robson Bridge. The club and town have really done a brilliant job of honouring both Robson and Sir Alf Ramsey. For this they both deserve a lot of recognition and respect. It was just then a case of following other fans to the ground.
3. What you did before the game pub/chippy.... home fans friendly?
As we had been allocated a very small corner of the stadium (and we were planning on buying on the gate), we spent a while looking for where the away fans were seated. Whilst doing this we decided to get something to eat from a nearby burger van near the Bobby Robson Stand. The home fans generally seemed fairly friendly - the game has no rival aspect (and as such they were welcoming). The ticket office is right next door to the away entrance. It can be a bit confusing, as it looks as though it is simply another queue for the home fans to enter the ground. In fact we resorted to asking stewards if this was the right one for us/
4. What you thought on seeing the ground, first impressions of away end then other sides of the ground?
The ground stills holds good character to it, something that we do seem to have lost at Deepdale and many other grounds nowadays. Outside are the Bobby Robson and Alf Ramsey statues - fairly bigger names in the game than say Michael Jackson at Fulham! The away end is a top corner - we had around 300 fans there and with the small space and the close roof, we were able to make a lot of noise when we wanted to.
Portman Road is a decent ground, and isn’t completely modernised like certain grounds I’ve been to before. In a way, you do appreciate them keeping to their roots. At the same time though, the grounds do not have the conveniences that modern grounds now have. With the recent heavy rainfall, the pitch was badly torn up in places. The toilets had an amount of rainwater coming in (I mentioned this to a steward on my way back to my seat, whom told me it was being sorted in coming weeks).
5. Comment on the game itself, atmosphere, stewards, pies, facilities etc..
My judgment prior to the game was to be wrong (it’s very rarely right- I’d be a rich man by now otherwise), as Preston came out looking strong in the away yellow. Ipswich did not look like a team currently sitting 4th in the Championship. We stroked the ball around well, not constantly resorting to long ball. Kevin Davies looked sharp, and we had one cleared off the line from Ian Hume. At the end of the first half, Davies conceded a penalty with handball from a corner. Frustrating! The penalty was saved, but the rebound was pounced upon. No more than 4 minutes later and Preston were level! It was eventually a long ball that unlocked the Town defence, Kevin Davies latching on for a brilliant finish. 1-1 at half time. PNE came out in the second half, and once again looked very good value. After further numerous chances, we had to settle for 1-1 and a replay back at Deepdale.
Atmosphere? Ipswich made very little noise, particularly the fans near us. The first noise we heard from anyone was the cheer after the goal. Thy began drumming up the other end and a little sing-song in the second half, but the drummer wasn’t great- hitting a constant bang bang bang bang, no variety at all! We made all the noise, and the Ipswich fans tend to head for the exits very early on. This was greeted with a chorus of ‘we can see you sneaking out’ started by yours truly! Sorry Ipswich!
Stewards were good, and let us sit wherever we wanted. They had no qualms with us ‘standers’ at the back either. Kudos to them - in recent years we have suffered with some unfair stewards. Didn’t get a pie as someone told me the queue was very long! Similar with the facilities as I previously described- showing age.
6. Comment on getting away from the ground after the game:
Easy to get back to the car in the pouring rain. Give yourselves time after, as you will sit in a lot of traffic out of Ipswich. Listened to the North London Derby on the way home!
7. Summary of overall thoughts of the day out:
Really enjoyed the day as seeing the famous North End is getting hard to come by for myself and the others. Gave them a good game, and hope we can win the replay up at Deepdale! PNE! I have the utmost respect for Ipswich’s honouring of two heroes of English football. Just get the fans to make some noise!