26th September 2008 Burnaby Road Portsmouth
This years Inter Services Rugby League challenge sponsored by Babcock reached its climax at Burnaby Road with the RN hosting the RAF and provided a day full of high drama and emotion as the RN seniors regained the Inter Services Title, the RN Academy side fell short by one point of regaining the Academy crown and the RN Ladies picked up their first ever win in the Inter Services series in their maiden season. This final day of matches was blessed with near perfect conditions, the weather being dry, warm and windless with the pitch in superb condition following much TLC by the ground staff and a good soaking of rain 36 hours previously.
The RAF have been the ‘monkey on the back’ of the RN for the past three years frustrating attempts by the Senior Service to regain the Inter Services crown whilst at the same time taking it themselves; so despite the RAF needing a big win to retain the title nothing was being taken for granted. The opening minutes of the game were played mainly in the RN half, however, the RAF had no real clear cut chances against a RN defence very fired up for this match. The break came on the 10 minute mark with a move that took the RN to the right of the RAF posts 25 metres out, electing to come back inside stand off Steve Lockton put in an inch perfect kick across the field and behind the RAF cover, Jim Barnes was onside and took the ball, crossing the line to post the first points of the game but the try was not converted. For the next 25 or so minutes the score remained at 4:0 due to a combination of stern defence and several handling errors, this meant neither side really got on top. Finally, the RAF created a move, influential skipper Martin Wood launched a long pass out to the RAF left which was gathered by centre John Turner who beat the RN defence to cross out wide; as with the RN try the conversion was missed, the scores were tied at 4-4 and remained so for the last five minutes of the half.
The third quarter of the match was very much attritional stuff with both sides unable to make the breakthrough. The crucial turning point came when the RAF were reduced to 12 men for 10 minutes by Super League Ref Phil Bentham following a ‘Yellow Card’ offence. This spurred the RN on to press home their numerical advantage and after 28 minutes on the last tackle another speculative kick was put into the corner by the RN, despite having cover in the in goal area the RAF spilled the ball RN, winger Pete Howe gratefully gathering the loose ball to touch down and put his side ahead again; Dane Smallbone putting over a fine conversion. The RN now began to exert more pressure and the next score came from the RN right wing; great work across the face of the RAF defensive line got the ball to centre James Wagstaffe who powered his way over and with a fine conversion from Alex Scruton it was now 16 - 4 with the clock running down. The RN were not finished with the scoreboard though and as the final whistle drew near the RN swept forward from their own half and moved the ball from right to left before Alex Scruton crossed to seal both the match and the Inter Services Title in magnificent style. RN skipper Jamie Goss was awarded Man of the Match by Ref Bentham, thoroughly deserving the award not only for his overall play throughout the match but for his leadership in keeping the RN side focussed thus preventing any chance of a repeat of past defeats to the RAF. The Kenny Taylor award on the night went to Stand Off Steve Lockton for another outstanding contribution especially his tactical kicking.
RN:-  Dane Smallbone, James Wagstaffe, Jim Barnes, Tom Boyce, Pete Howe, Steve Lockton, Kev Botwood, Jamie Goss (C), Mark Robinson, Lewis Taylor (V), Gareth Cadmore, Dave Gee, Danny Johnson, Alex Scruton, Lee Hunter, Andrew Dennis, Lee Rossiter.
Scorers- T: Barnes, Howe, Wagstaffe, Scruton G: Smallbone1 (Conv), Scruton 2 (Conv)
RAF:- Steve Hughes, Karl Craven, Gareth Evans, John Turner, Craig Donald, Martin Wood (c), Gary Dunn, James Le Mar, Jimmy Bardgett, Colin Whitham, Al Blewitt, Dale Jinks,  Angelo Flammia, Johnny Ledger, Dane Malvey, Dave Hankingson, Craig King
Royal Navy Ladies 34:6 RAF Ladies
With both sides losing their opening matches to the Army the title was not up for grabs this time, but both teams were determined to round off the series with a win, especially the RN who were in front of their home crowd for the first time ever. The RN got off to a dream start after early pressure, a penalty was awarded to the home side and from the resulting play winger Emma Swinton crossed to score the first ever points for RN Ladies in Inter Services competition. Shortly after the RAF were stunned by a further RN score, loose forward Fiesha Green powering over from 20 metres under the posts, scrum half Sam Alderson smashed over a great conversion to make the score 10:0. Following this opening flurry of points the game settled down and the RAF came into the game more but could not find away through the RN defence. As half time approached probably the best play of the match saw the RN break from the halfway line; good ball handling out to the wing allowed Emma Swinton to push for the line, a great final pass allowed second row Lou Graham to sprint the last 20 metres to score the try sending the teams off at the break with the RN ahead by 14. The second half was a great advert for the Ladies game with massive commitment and skill from both sides However, the Navy continued to dominate with Fiesha Green becoming the scourge of the RAF defence running in a second half hat trick of trys to add to her effort in the first half. Sam Alderson was on target twice more to take her tally of goals to 3 for the match. RN skipper Rachel Mifsud marshalled her ladies well throughout keeping the pressure up on the opposition. The RAF managed only one try in the match, prop forward and RAF Skipper Vickie Dillon powering through the RN defence to go round behind the posts for the score, Erica Walker adding the extras. The success was complete with the award of the man of the match trophy to  4 try hero Fiesha Green. A great result for the Ladies in their inaugural year, rewarding the effort put in not only by the players themselves but also by the coaching staff who have done a great job in bringing Ladies RL so far in a few short months.
RN Ladies:- Tegwyn Leadbetter, Emma Swinton, Leanne Green, Sarah Mitchell, Erica Attwoood, Lou Clarke, Sam Alderson, Sarah Simms, Rachel Mifsud(C), Pam Williams, Lou Graham, Emily Atkins, Fiesha Green, Sara Collen, Laura Kennedy, Claire Brewer.
Scorers:- T: Green(4) Swinton (2) Graham G: Alderson 3(Conv)
RAF Ladies:- Mandy Mitchell, Erica Walker, Sue Dewing (V Capt), Stacey Gill, Rachel Watson, Sally Thornton, Vicky Porter, Fiona Davies, Lyn Armstrong, Vicky Dillon (Capt), Sarah Kelly, Jude Yarsley, Sarah Critchley, Rachel Hodgett, Julie Crole
Scorers: T: Vicky Dillon G: Erica Walker
Royal Navy ‘A’ 56:6 RAF ‘A’
Another incident packed Academy match saw the RN convincingly turn over the RAF but despite posting 56 points they came up just short of the total needed to wrestle the IS trophy from the Army. The first quarter of the match was disrupted by injury to the RAF full back following a heavy challenge from the RN defence. After the enforced break, due to injury, the match got underway again with the scores all square at 2:2. 16 minutes passed before the RN scored their first try, great approach work by Craig Sutton and Ben Nicholson got the RN within sight of the posts and hooker Johnny Platt forced his way over to give the RN the lead. Matt Bryers was next up for the RN, the ex Warrington and Swinton Lions 2nd row celebrated his debut with a fine try to push the RN out to 10:2 after 20 minutes. Things were made worse for the RAF when the Ref showed the yellow Card to an RAF forward for an incident as the try was being scored. Down to 12 men the RAF were up against it and the RN took full advantage with a further 2 trys before the break, both scored by full back Tin Vondonaravalu,  McCoy Turner adding both conversions. Half time RN 22 :2 RAF.
The second half started quietly with no scores until ten minutes into the half, Tim Vondonaravalu carrying on where he left off in the first half; breaking from deep inside his own half he beat the RAF defence before slipping the ball to Alex Watts who crossed under the posts to make Turners conversion an easy one, 28:2. The RAF did pull a few points back with a try of their own scored by No 2 Rutherford but agonisingly for the RAF the conversion struck the posts and bounced out. More good work by Matt Bryers saw him held up just short of the line but once again Johnny Platt poached another fine hookers try right under the posts, Turner again adding the extras, 34:6. The RN were now playing some marvellous rugby league with plenty of slick handling across the park and with confidence sky high the two points for the next penalty were duly turned down in favour of running the ball, loose forward Glen Bilton duly obliged  getting his name on the score sheet, converted 40:6. All eyes now began looking at watches and scoreboards especially when right wing Aaron Hansen went over to put the RN within sight of a remarkable victory.  Two further trys and a conversion got the RN to 56 points but a couple of handling errors late on in the game just prevented the extra point which would have given the team the trophy. The RN side had climbed a massive mountain to even get close to the required points and were understandably upset at missing out by such a close margin and even the manner of the victory was little consolation. On a brighter note Johnny Platt was awarded man of the match for his massive effort throughout the match including his hat trick of try’s.
RN:- Tim Vondonaravalu, Dan Hensby, Ben Nicholson, Alex Watts, Aaron Hansen, McCoy Turner, Ben Taylor, Ben Cartwright, Johnny Platt, Richard Sharpe, Matt Bryers, Craig Sutton, Glen Bilton, Mark Jones, Ryan Hayward, Ben Malligan, Ade Peel.
Scorers:
RN          T- Platt (3), Vondonaravalu(2), Bryers, Bilton, Hayward, Hansen, Watts
               G -Turner 5(Conv), Watts 2 (Conv)
RAF:       T – Richard Rutherford
               G -  Scott Cash