National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Reducing the Duration of Untreated Psychosis
in the United States (R34)
PAR-16-265, R01 Research Project Grant
Approximately 100,000 adolescents and young adults in the
United States experience a first episode of psychosis (FEP) every year. The
early phase of psychotic illness is widely viewed as a critical opportunity
for indicated prevention, and a chance to alter the downward trajectory and
poor outcomes associated with schizophrenia and related psychotic disorders.
Compared to traditional treatment approaches, programs that integrate
pharmacologic, psychological, and rehabilitation interventions for FEP, i.e.,
team-based Coordinated Specialty Care (CSC), have been found to produce a
range of positive clinical and functional outcomes. However, the timing of
treatment is critical; short and long-term outcomes are better when
individuals begin treatment close to the onset of psychosis. Unfortunately, numerous
studies find a substantial delay between the onset of psychotic symptoms and
the initiation of FEP care; in the U.S. treatment is typically delayed
between one and three years. Early identification of FEP, rapid referral to evidence-based
services, and effective engagement in CSC are essential to shortening the
duration of untreated psychosis (DUP) and pre-empting the functional
deterioration common in psychotic disorders. The World Health Organization
advocates reducing DUP to 3 months or less. Accordingly, this Funding
Opportunity Announcement (FOA) seeks planning grant applications that (1)
identify a baseline rate of DUP in community settings that include CSC
programs; (2) map referral pathways to CSC care, (3) identify bottlenecks and
gaps in the pathway to CSC care, and (4) develop and pilot test feasible
strategies for substantially reducing DUP among persons with FEP.
July 19, 2016; November 18, 2016; March 17, 2017; July 18,
2017; November 17, 2017; March 19, 2018; July 18, 2018; November 19, 2018;
March 19, 2019, by 5:00 PM local time of applicant organization. All types of non-AIDS applications allowed
for this funding opportunity announcement are due on these dates.
Applicants are encouraged to apply early to allow adequate
time to make any corrections to errors found in the application during the
submission process by the due date.
November 2016, March 2017, June 2017, November 2017, March
2018, June 2018, November 2018, March 2019, June 2019
January 2017, May 2017, October 2017,  January 2018, May
2018, October 2018, January 2019, May 2019, October 2019
April 2017, July 2017, September 2017, April 2018, July
2018, September 2018, April 2019, July 2019, September 2019
It is critical that applicants follow the instructions in
the SF424
(R&R) Application Guide, except where instructed to do otherwise (in
this FOA or in a Notice from the NIH
Guide for Grants and Contracts). Conformance to all requirements (both
in the Application Guide and the FOA) is required and strictly enforced. Applicants
must read and follow all application instructions in the Application Guide as
well as any program-specific instructions noted in Section IV. When the program-specific
instructions deviate from those in the Application Guide, follow the
program-specific instructions. Applications that do not comply with
these instructions may be delayed or not accepted for review.
There are several options to submit your application to the agency through Grants.gov. You can use the ASSIST system to prepare, submit and track your application online. You can download an application package from Grants.gov, complete the forms offline, submit the completed forms to Grants.gov and track your application in eRA Commons. Or, you can use other institutional system-to-system solutions to  prepare and submit your application to Grants.gov and track your application in eRA Commons. Learn more.
Approximately 100,000 adolescents and young adults in the
United States experience a first episode of psychosis (FEP) every year. The
early phase of psychotic illness is widely viewed as a critical opportunity for
indicated prevention, and a chance to alter the downward trajectory and poor
outcomes associated with schizophrenia and related psychotic disorders.
Compared to traditional treatment approaches, programs that integrate
pharmacologic, psychological, and rehabilitation interventions for FEP, i.e.,
team-based Coordinated Specialty care (CSC), have been found to produce a range
of positive clinical and functional outcomes, including reduced symptoms, greater
involvement in work or school, and improved quality of life. However, the
timing of treatment is critical; short and long-term outcomes are better when
individuals begin treatment close to the onset of psychosis.
International consensus statements from the World Health
Organization recommend that specialty care for FEP start within 3 months of
illness onset. However, more than two dozen studies conducted worldwide have
observed a substantial delay (on average 2 years) between the appearance of
psychotic symptoms and the initiation of treatment. Two influential
meta-analyses clearly establish that the duration of untreated psychosis (DUP),
the time between the onset of psychosis and initiation of treatment, is
correlated with poor outcome. In the United States, DUP ranges between one and
three years, suggesting that many people with FEP are missing a critical
opportunity to benefit from early psychosis intervention.
Research suggests that DUP can be reduced by enhancing early
detection, treatment referral, and clinical engagement mechanisms. Reducing DUP
in the United States from current levels of 1-3 years to the international
standard of no more than 3 months should be a major focus of applied research
efforts. Research to improve FEP case identification and referral in the United
States is a logical complement to other NIMH initiatives on improving outcomes
for people with FEP, such as the Recovery
After an Initial Schizophrenia Episode (RAISE)  initiative, which found
that CSC produced superior clinical and functional improvements compared to
typical care, especially among clients with shorter DUP.
This FOA aims to support research that will (1) investigate
early links in the FEP case identification and referral chain in the United
States, and (2) develop feasible strategies for reducing delays in early
detection, speedy referral, and rapid initiation of stage-specific treatment.
The target population is not limited to first episode schizophrenia, but
includes all persons experiencing a first episode of psychosis regardless of
presenting DSM-IV diagnosis. Applicants are encouraged to base research
activities in settings that link to treatment systems with CSC programs for
FEP. A variety of configurations for FEP specialty care programs are possible,
but evidence-based CSC treatment involves integrated, team-based care and
typically feature use of single antipsychotic medications, prescribed in low doses;
family psychoeducation; supported employment and/or education;
cognitive-behavioral therapy oriented to recovery; coordination with primary
care services; and continuity of care across inpatient and outpatient treatment
settings.
Applications submitted to this FOA are encouraged to develop
and test the feasibility of strategies for reducing contributors to DUP within
the selected community setting, based on results of the benchmarking
activities. It is expected that pilot data from feasibility tests will be used
to support applications for subsequent R01 intervention studies that will
compare alternative methods for reducing DUP in community service settings. The
strategies proposed to reduce DUP should aim to remove significant bottlenecks
as well as close gaps in the pathway to specialty FEP care. NIMH encourages
applications that explore approaches for producing one or more of the
following:
Applications submitted to this FOA should consider “supply
side” approaches (e.g., targeting clinical and community systems), such as the
development and testing of strategies for training primary care physicians and
nurses, school and college counselors, emergency department staff, police, and
mental health “generalists” to recognize signs of early psychosis, and the
improvement of referral networks to fast-track the initiation of FEP care. This
FOA is also intended to encourage “demand side” approaches (e.g., engaging
people with FEP and their family members, friends, caregivers and others close
to the affected individual) to improve recognition of early symptoms,
help-seeking, access, and engagement in care for persons with FEP and/or youth
at high clinical risk for psychosis, through education, decision-support
systems, and other tools, including social marketing, social media and social
networking.
Research to reduce DUP requires expertise on the
characteristics of service delivery systems and community settings in which DUP
reduction strategies would be embedded, as well as expertise on the needs, life
circumstances, and diversity of the population of young people with FEP and/or
at high clinical risk of psychosis. Investigators should convey knowledge of
DUP assessment strategies and factors that may contribute to treatment delays
in the U.S. health care system. Multi-disciplinary research teams with
complementary areas of expertise are encouraged. NIMH encourages applications
that involve collaboration with stakeholders from multiple clinical or
community practice settings, as well as consumers of services and their family
members and social contacts.
In addition, NIMH welcomes applications proposing to
leverage existing practice research infrastructures such as the Mental Health
Research Network (MHRN), the Clinical Translational Science Awards Program
(CTSA) and other research and practice networks looking to conduct studies to
reduce DUP. NIMH also welcomes coordination of DUP research with other public
and private initiatives that specifically address early identification and
treatment of young people at high risk for mental illness. For example, since
2014 the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) has
supported the implementation of evidence-based treatment programs for FEP
across the United States via a set-aside in the Community Mental Health Block
Grant Program (CMHBG). The NIMH estimates that by 2017, over 100 CSC programs
will be operating in 32 states, as a consequence of the CMHBG set-aside,
representing a tremendous opportunity for advancing DUP reduction research.
This FOA, and the companion FOA, PAR-16-265,
support experimental and quasi-experimental studies focused on designing,
refining, and testing algorithms of practical and accurate case identification
of persons with FEP and/or at high risk of psychosis within a myriad of
possible clinical and community contexts, in combination with strategies that
promote rapid referral to the appropriate stage-specific specialty care.
Applications to this FOA should focus on practical and
reproducible strategies to achieve substantial DUP reduction for persons with
FEP. The NIMH encourages applications in which referral to CSC programs is
feasible. This FOA supports studies on the research topics listed below, which
are intended to be illustrative, not exhaustive:
It is expected that applications submitted to this FOA will
identify other important, innovative and impactful research topics.
Investigators considering applying to this FOA are encouraged to contact the Scientific/Research Contact for
this FOA for additional guidance prior to submitting an application.
Investigators who have already completed significant developmental or pilot
work in this area should consider an application to PAR-16-265.
The R34 should propose the developmental work to be
performed that would enhance the probability of success in a larger study.
Designs need not be reduced scope versions of the anticipated larger study, but
should instead attempt to develop and refine the research strategies to be
utilized in the subsequent large-scale study. NIMH recognizes that while the
scope of interest for this FOA is consistent across both this and the companion
FOA, PAR-16-265,
there are specific research topics for which the field may not yet be ready for
a large-scale trial. This FOA provides the opportunity for “high risk, high
reward studies” that may be of high priority to the NIMH. Thus, appropriate
research activities for this FOA might include:
Given the intended pilot nature of this FOA, conducting a
formal test of outcomes is not required and obtaining an estimate of an effect
size may not be possible.
Grant: A support mechanism providing money, property, or
both to an eligible entity to carry out an approved project or activity.
The OER
Glossary and the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide provide details on
these application types.
The NIMH intends to commit approximately $3,000,000 in FY
2017 to fund between 4 and 6 grants submitted to this FOA and the companion FOA PAR-16-265.
Direct costs are limited to $450,000 over the R34 project
period, with no more than $225,000 in direct costs allowed in any single year
The total project period for an application submitted in
response to this FOA may not exceed 3 years.
NIH grants policies as
described in the NIH
Grants Policy Statement will apply
to the applications submitted and awards made in response to this FOA.
The following types of Higher Education Institutions
are always encouraged to apply for NIH support as Public or Private
Institutions of Higher Education:
o    Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs)
o    Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities (TCCUs)
o    Alaska Native and Native Hawaiian Serving Institutions
o    Asian American Native American Pacific Islander Serving
Institutions (AANAPISIs)
Nonprofits Other Than Institutions of Higher Education
Non-domestic (non-U.S.) Entities (Foreign Institutions) are
not eligible to apply.
Non-domestic (non-U.S.) components of U.S. Organizations are not eligible
to apply.
Foreign components, as defined in
the NIH Grants Policy Statement, are  allowed.
Applicant organizations must complete and maintain the
following registrations as described in the SF 424 (R&R) Application Guide
to be eligible to apply for or receive an award. All registrations must be
completed prior to the application being submitted. Registration can take 6
weeks or more, so applicants should begin the registration process as soon as
possible. The NIH
Policy on Late Submission of Grant Applications states that failure to
complete registrations in advance of a due date is not a valid reason for a
late submission.
All PD(s)/PI(s) must have an eRA Commons account.
 PD(s)/PI(s) should work with their organizational officials to either
create a new account or to affiliate their existing account with the applicant
organization in eRA Commons. If the PD/PI is also the organizational Signing Official,
they must have two distinct eRA Commons accounts, one for each role. Obtaining
an eRA Commons account can take up to 2 weeks.
Any individual(s) with the skills, knowledge, and resources
necessary to carry out the proposed research as the Program Director(s)/Principal
Investigator(s) (PD(s)/PI(s)) is invited to work with his/her organization to
develop an application for support. Individuals from underrepresented racial
and ethnic groups as well as individuals with disabilities are always
encouraged to apply for NIH support.
For institutions/organizations proposing multiple PDs/PIs, visit
the Multiple Program Director/Principal Investigator Policy and submission
details in the Senior/Key Person Profile (Expanded) Component of the SF424 (R&R)
Application Guide.
This FOA does not require cost sharing as defined in the NIH
Grants Policy Statement.
Applicant organizations may submit more than one application,
provided that each application is scientifically distinct.
The NIH will not accept duplicate or highly overlapping
applications under review at the same time.  This means that the NIH will
not accept:
Applicants must obtain the SF424 (R&R) application
package associated with this funding opportunity using the “Apply for Grant
Electronically” button in this FOA or following the directions provided at Grants.gov.
It is critical that applicants follow the instructions in
the SF424
(R&R) Application Guide, including Supplemental
Grant Application Instructions except where instructed in this funding
opportunity announcement to do otherwise. Conformance to the requirements in
the Application Guide is required and strictly enforced. Applications that are
out of compliance with these instructions may be delayed or not accepted for
review.
For information on Application Submission and Receipt, visit Frequently
Asked Questions – Application Guide, Electronic Submission of Grant
Applications.
All page limitations described in the SF424 Application
Guide and the Table of
Page Limits must be followed.
The following section supplements the instructions found in
the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide and should be used for preparing an
application to this FOA.
All instructions in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide
must be followed.
All instructions in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide
must be followed.
All instructions in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide
must be followed.
All instructions in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide
must be followed.
Biographical
Sketch Describe investigators' knowledge of DUP assessment
strategies and factors that may contribute to treatment delays in the U.S.
health care system. The biographical sketches should also describe the qualifications
of the PD/PI and other senior investigators, including expertise in the
identification and treatment of people with FEP and expertise in the service
delivery systems or community settings in which the selected DUP reduction
strategies would be embedded.
All instructions in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide
must be followed.
All instructions in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide
must be followed.
All instructions in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide
must be followed.
All instructions in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide
must be followed, with the following additional instructions:
Research
Strategy: For the initial “benchmarking” phase of the research,
applications submitted to this FOA should (1) specify a scientifically
acceptable operational definition of DUP; (2) use reliable measures to quantify
overall DUP among persons who enroll in FEP specialty care; (3) map the various
pathways that channel persons with FEP to CSC care programs; and (4) identify
bottlenecks and gaps in these referral pathways, including barriers that impede
the following:
Applications should propose a DUP reduction approach that
has the potential to substantially reduce DUP in the target population of
people with FEP. Applications should also describe novel strategies proposed
for reducing DUP among people with FEP and/or measuring DUP in community
treatment settings in the U.S. The application should describe a project that
involves substantial DUP reduction for persons with FEP as a primary outcome.
Applications should describe appropriate study milestones
that are clearly defined for all of the study aims. The milestones should be
feasible and quantifiable and described in the context of the study timeline.
Potential challenges that may result in enrollment shortfalls should be
discussed, along with and corresponding solutions to address enrollment
problems.
Applications should describe the multi-disciplinary features
of the proposed research team, including team members' complementary areas of
expertise.
The application should also describe collaborations with
stakeholders from multiple clinical or community practice settings, as well as with
consumers of services and their family members and social contacts, detailing stakeholders'
engagement in the research process, including project design.
Applications should identify the target(s) of the proposed
services intervention to reduce DUP and provide evidence of the association
between those targets and the outcomes of interest (e.g., DUP, symptoms, and functioning).
The application should also provide evidence that: 1) the outcome measures have
been validated or will be validated during the pilot work, 2) the outcomes
measured include stakeholder relevant outcomes, 3) the intervention could be
implemented in typical service settings using typically available personnel and
resources, and 4) fidelity in intervention delivery will be monitored. Include
the following:
(1) a conceptual framework that clearly identifies the
target(s)/mechanism(s) and the empirical evidence linking the
target(s)/mechanism(s) to the reduction in DUP;
(2) plans for assessing whether the services intervention
engages the target(s)/mechanism(s) using valid measures that are as direct and
objective as is feasible, including the specific measures, the assessment
schedule, and the justification for the assessment strategy (e.g., evidence
regarding the validity and feasibility of the proposed measures);
(3) an analytic strategy for data analyses that will be used
to examine whether the intervention engages the target(s) and whether
intervention-induced changes in the target(s) are associated with reduction in
DUP (i.e., mediation).
(4) justification for the sample size in terms of
feasibility goals; and
(5) a clear rationale for the choice of methods proposed.
In the case of multi-element interventions, the application
should specify the conceptual basis, assessment plan, and analytic strategy, as
detailed above, for the target(s)/mechanism(s) corresponding to each DUP
reduction intervention element.
Protections
for Human Subjects: Applications with data collection plans
that involve multiple respondent groups (e.g., clients/patients,
therapists/providers, supervisors, administrators) should address provisions
for human subject protections and consenting procedures for all participant
groups, accordingly.
The NIMH has published updated policies and guidance for
investigators regarding human research protection and clinical research data
and safety monitoring (NOT-MH-15-025). 
The application’s Protection of Human Subjects section should reflect the
policies and guidance in this notice.  Plans for the protection of
research subjects and data and safety monitoring will be reviewed by the NIMH
for consistency with NIMH and NIH policies and federal regulations.
Resource
Sharing Plan: Individuals are required to comply with the
instructions for the Resource Sharing Plans as provided in the SF424 (R&R)
Application Guide, with the following modification:
To advance the goal of furthering research through widespread
data sharing among researchers, investigators funded under this FOA are
expected to share those data via the NIMH Data Archive (NDA) (https://ndar.nih.gov/; see NOT-MH-09-005, NOT-MH-14-015 and NOT-MH-15-012). Established by the NIH, the NDA is a secure
informatics platform for scientific collaboration and data-sharing that enables
advancement of research through the effective communication of detailed
research results, tools, and supporting documentation.
Investigators funded under this FOA are expected to use NDA
technologies to submit data in accordance with the NDA Data Sharing Terms and
Conditions, incorporated by reference, which can be found at https://ndar.nih.gov/contribute_data_sharing_regimen.html.
The resource sharing plan should be formulated in accordance with the NDA Data
Sharing Terms and Conditions.
Appendix:
 Do not use the Appendix to circumvent page limits. Follow all
instructions for the Appendix as described in the SF424 (R&R) Application
Guide.
When conducting clinical research, follow all instructions
for completing PHS Inclusion Enrollment Report as described in the SF424
(R&R) Application Guide.
All instructions in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide
must be followed.
See Part 1. Section III.1 for information regarding the
requirement for obtaining a unique entity identifier and for completing and
maintaining active registrations in System for Award Management (SAM), NATO
Commercial and Government Entity (NCAGE) Code (if applicable), eRA Commons, and
Grants.gov
Part I. Overview Information contains information about Key Dates and times. Applicants are encouraged to
submit applications before the due date to ensure they have time to make any
application corrections that might be necessary for successful submission. When
a submission date falls on a weekend or Federal
holiday, the application deadline is automatically extended to the next
business day.
Organizations must submit applications to Grants.gov (the online portal to find and apply for grants
across all Federal agencies). Applicants must then complete the submission
process by tracking the status of the application in the eRA Commons, NIH’s electronic system for grants administration.
NIH and Grants.gov systems check the application against many of the
application instructions upon submission. Errors must be corrected and a
changed/corrected application must be submitted to Grants.gov on or before the application
due date and time.  If a Changed/Corrected application is submitted after the
deadline, the application will be considered late. Applications that miss the
due date and time are subjected to the NIH Policy on Late Application
Submission.
Applicants
are responsible for viewing their application before the due date in the eRA
Commons to ensure accurate and successful submission.
Information on the submission process and a definition of
on-time submission are provided in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide.
This initiative is not subject to intergovernmental
review.
All NIH awards are subject to the terms and conditions, cost
principles, and other considerations described in the NIH
Grants Policy Statement.
Pre-award costs are allowable only as described in the NIH
Grants Policy Statement.
Applications must be submitted electronically following the
instructions described in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide.  Paper
applications will not be accepted.
Applicants must complete all required registrations
before the application due date. Section
III. Eligibility Information contains information about registration.
For assistance with your electronic application or for more information on the electronic submission
process, visit Applying
Electronically. If you encounter a system issue beyond your control that
threatens your ability to complete the submission process on-time, you must
follow the Guidelines
for Applicants Experiencing System Issues. For assistance with application
submission, contact the Application Submission Contacts in Section VII.
All PD(s)/PI(s) must include their eRA Commons ID in
the Credential field of the Senior/Key Person Profile Component of the
SF424(R&R) Application Package. Failure to register in the Commons
and to include a valid PD/PI Commons ID in the credential field will prevent
the successful submission of an electronic application to NIH. See Section III of this FOA for information on
registration requirements.
The applicant organization must ensure that the DUNS
number it provides on the application is the same number used in the
organization’s profile in the eRA Commons and for the System for Award Management.
Additional information may be found in the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide.
See more tips for avoiding common errors.
Upon receipt, applications will be evaluated for
completeness and compliance with application instructions by the Center for
Scientific Review, NIH. Applications that are incomplete or non-compliant will
not be reviewed.
NIMH encourages the use of common data elements (CDEs) in
basic, clinical, and applied research, patient registries, and other human
subject research to facilitate broader and more effective use of data and
advance research across studies.  CDEs are data elements that have been
identified and defined for use in multiple data sets across different
studies.  Use of CDEs can facilitate data sharing and standardization to
improve data quality and enable data integration from multiple studies and
sources, including electronic health records.  NIH ICs have identified
CDEs for many clinical domains (e.g., mental illness), types of studies (e.g.
genome-wide association studies (GWAS)), types of outcomes (e.g.,
patient-reported outcomes), and patient registries (e.g., the Global Rare
Diseases Patient Registry and Data Repository).  NIH has established a
“Common Data Element (CDE) Resource Portal" (https://www.nlm.nih.gov/cde/) to assist investigators in
identifying NIH-supported CDEs when developing protocols, case report forms,
and other instruments for data collection. The Portal provides guidance about
and access to NIH-supported CDE initiatives and other tools and resources for
the appropriate use of CDEs and data standards in NIH-funded research. 
Investigators are encouraged to consult the Portal, in particular the Consensus
Measures for Phenotypes and eXposures Mental Health Research Toolkit (https://www.phenxtoolkit.org/), and describe in their
applications any use they will make of NIH-supported CDEs in their
projects.
Applicants are required to follow the instructions for
post-submission materials, as described in NOT-OD-13-030.
Only the review criteria described below will be considered
in the review process. As part of the NIH mission,
all applications submitted to the NIH in support of biomedical and behavioral
research are evaluated for scientific and technical merit through the NIH peer
review system.
For this particular announcement, note the following:
This FOA supports the development and/or pilot
testing of new or adapted interventions, pilot testing of interventions with
demonstrated efficacy in broader scale effectiveness trials, or conducting
pilot innovative services research that requires preliminary testing or
development. Because this is a clinical exploratory/developmental grant
application, it need not have extensive background material or preliminary information
as one might normally expect in an R01 application. Accordingly, reviewers will
focus their evaluation on the conceptual framework, the level of innovation,
and the potential to significantly advance our knowledge or understanding. Reviewers
will be instructed to place less emphasis on methodological details and certain
indicators traditionally used in evaluating the scientific merit of R01
applications, including supportive preliminary data. Appropriate justification
for the proposed work can be provided through literature citations, data from
other sources, or, when available, from investigator generated data.
Preliminary data are not required for R34 applications, but may be included if
available.
Reviewers will provide an overall impact score to reflect
their assessment of the likelihood for the project to exert a sustained,
powerful influence on the research field(s) involved, in consideration of the
following review criteria and additional review criteria (as applicable for the
project proposed).
Reviewers will consider each of the review criteria below in
the determination of scientific merit, and give a separate score for each. An
application does not need to be strong in all categories to be judged likely to
have major scientific impact. For example, a project that by its nature is not
innovative may be essential to advance a field.
Does the project address an
important problem or a critical barrier to progress in the field? Is there a
strong scientific premise for the project? If the aims of the project are achieved,
how will scientific knowledge, technical capability, and/or clinical practice
be improved? How will successful completion of the aims change the concepts,
methods, technologies, treatments, services, or preventative interventions that
drive this field?
Does the proposed approach have the
potential to substantially reduce DUP in the target population of people with
Are the PD(s)/PI(s), collaborators,
and other researchers well suited to the project? If Early Stage Investigators
or New Investigators, or in the early stages of independent careers, do they
have appropriate experience and training? If established, have they
demonstrated an ongoing record of accomplishments that have advanced their
field(s)? If the project is collaborative or multi-PD/PI, do the investigators
have complementary and integrated expertise; are their leadership approach,
governance and organizational structure appropriate for the project?  Do the
qualifications of the PD/PI and other senior investigators include expertise in
the identification and treatment of people with FEP and expertise in the
service delivery systems or community settings in which the selected DUP
reduction strategies would be embedded? Do research team members have
complementary areas of expertise?
Does the application challenge and
seek to shift current research or clinical practice paradigms by utilizing
novel theoretical concepts, approaches or methodologies, instrumentation, or
interventions? Are the concepts, approaches or methodologies, instrumentation,
or interventions novel to one field of research or novel in a broad sense? Is a
refinement, improvement, or new application of theoretical concepts, approaches
or methodologies, instrumentation, or interventions proposed? Are novel
strategies proposed for reducing DUP among people with FEP and/or measuring DUP
in community treatment settings in the U.S.?
Are the overall strategy,
methodology, and analyses well-reasoned and appropriate to accomplish the
specific aims of the project? Have the investigators presented strategies to
ensure a robust and unbiased approach, as appropriate for the work proposed? Are
potential problems, alternative strategies, and benchmarks for success
presented? If the project is in the early stages of development, will the
strategy establish feasibility and will particularly risky aspects be managed? Have
the investigators presented adequate plans to address relevant biological
variables, such as sex, for studies in vertebrate animals or human subjects?
Does the project include a scientifically acceptable
operational definition of DUP? Are methods described for obtaining reliable
estimates of DUP in community programs? Does the project include substantial
DUP reduction for persons with FEP as a primary outcome? If clinical, community
or public health settings are involved, are stakeholders sufficiently engaged
in the research process, including project design?
For projects involving a clinical trial, does the
application provide evidence of the association between the intervention
target(s) and the endpoint(s) of interest? Are the outcome measures validated
and are stakeholder relevant outcomes included? Does the application describe
the monitoring of fidelity in intervention delivery in community practice
settings? Does the application provide justification for the sample size in
terms of feasibility goals? Is there a clear rationale for the choice of
methods proposed?
Does the application describe
appropriate milestones that are clearly defined for all of the study aims?
Does the project involve
collaborations with relevant stakeholders?
If the project involves human
subjects and/or NIH-defined clinical research, are the plans to address 1) the
protection of human subjects from research risks, and 2) inclusion (or
exclusion) of individuals on the basis of sex/gender, race, and ethnicity, as
well as the inclusion or exclusion of children, justified in terms of the
scientific goals and research strategy proposed?
Will the scientific environment in
which the work will be done contribute to the probability of success? Are the
institutional support, equipment and other physical resources available to the
investigators adequate for the project proposed? Will the project benefit from
unique features of the scientific environment, subject populations, or
collaborative arrangements?
As applicable for the project proposed, reviewers will
evaluate the following additional items while determining scientific and
technical merit, and in providing an overall impact score, but will not give
separate scores for these items.
For research that involves human
subjects but does not involve one of the six categories of research that are
exempt under 45 CFR Part 46, the committee will evaluate the justification for
involvement of human subjects and the proposed protections from research risk
relating to their participation according to the following five review criteria:
1) risk to subjects, 2) adequacy of protection against risks, 3) potential
benefits to the subjects and others, 4) importance of the knowledge to be
gained, and 5) data and safety monitoring for clinical trials.
For research that involves human
subjects and meets the criteria for one or more of the six categories of
research that are exempt under 45 CFR Part 46, the committee will evaluate: 1)
the justification for the exemption, 2) human subjects involvement and
characteristics, and 3) sources of materials. For additional information on
review of the Human Subjects section, please refer to the Guidelines for the Review of Human
Subjects.
When the proposed project involves
human subjects and/or NIH-defined clinical research, the committee will
evaluate the proposed plans for the inclusion (or exclusion) of individuals on
the basis of sex/gender, race, and ethnicity, as well as the inclusion (or
exclusion) of children to determine if it is justified in terms of the
scientific goals and research strategy proposed. For additional information on
review of the Inclusion section, please refer to the Guidelines for the Review of Inclusion
in Clinical Research.
The committee will evaluate the
involvement of live vertebrate animals as part of the scientific assessment
according to the following criteria: (1) description of proposed procedures
involving animals, including species, strains, ages, sex, and total number to
be used; (2) justifications for the use of animals versus alternative models
and for the appropriateness of the species proposed; (3) interventions to
minimize discomfort, distress, pain and injury; and (4) justification for
euthanasia method if NOT consistent with the AVMA Guidelines for the Euthanasia
of Animals. Reviewers will assess the use of chimpanzees as they would any
other application proposing the use of vertebrate animals. For additional
information on review of the Vertebrate Animals section, please refer to the Worksheet
for Review of the Vertebrate Animal Section.
Reviewers will assess whether
materials or procedures proposed are potentially hazardous to research
personnel and/or the environment, and if needed, determine whether adequate
protection is proposed.
For Resubmissions, the committee
will evaluate the application as now presented, taking into consideration the
responses to comments from the previous scientific review group and changes
made to the project.
For Revisions, the committee will
consider the appropriateness of the proposed expansion of the scope of the
project. If the Revision application relates to a specific line of
investigation presented in the original application that was not recommended
for approval by the committee, then the committee will consider whether the
responses to comments from the previous scientific review group are adequate
and whether substantial changes are clearly evident.
As applicable for the project proposed, reviewers will
consider each of the following items, but will not give scores for these items,
and should not consider them in providing an overall impact score.
Reviewers will assess the
information provided in this section of the application, including 1) the
Select Agent(s) to be used in the proposed research, 2) the registration status
of all entities where Select Agent(s) will be used, 3) the procedures that will
be used to monitor possession use and transfer of Select Agent(s), and 4) plans
for appropriate biosafety, biocontainment, and security of the Select Agent(s).
Reviewers will comment on whether the following
Resource Sharing Plans, or the rationale for not sharing the following types of
resources, are reasonable: (1) Data
Sharing Plan; (2) Sharing Model
Organisms; and (3)  Genomic Data Sharing Plan (GDS).
For projects involving key biological and/or chemical resources,
reviewers will comment on the brief plans proposed for identifying and ensuring
the validity of those resources.
Reviewers will consider whether the
budget and the requested period of support are fully justified and reasonable
in relation to the proposed research.
Applications will be evaluated for scientific and technical
merit by (an) appropriate Scientific Review Group(s) convened by NIMH, in
accordance with NIH peer
review policy and procedures, using the stated review
criteria. Assignment to a Scientific Review Group will be shown in the eRA
Commons.
As part of the scientific peer review, all applications:
Applications will be assigned to the appropriate NIH
Institute or Center. Applications will compete for available funds with all
other recommended applications . Following initial peer review, recommended applications
will receive a second level of review by the National Advisory Mental Health Council
. The following will be considered in making funding decisions:
After the peer review of the application is completed, the
PD/PI will be able to access his or her Summary Statement (written critique)
via the eRA
Commons. Refer to Part 1 for dates for peer review, advisory council
review, and earliest start date.
Information regarding the disposition of applications is
available in the NIH
Grants Policy Statement.
If the application is under consideration for funding, NIH
will request "just-in-time" information from the applicant as
described in the NIH
Grants Policy Statement.
A formal notification in the form of a Notice of Award (NoA)
will be provided to the applicant organization for successful applications. The
NoA signed by the grants management officer is the authorizing document and
will be sent via email to the grantee’s business official.
Awardees must comply with any funding restrictions described
in Section IV.5. Funding Restrictions. Selection
of an application for award is not an authorization to begin performance. Any
costs incurred before receipt of the NoA are at the recipient's risk. These costs
may be reimbursed only to the extent considered allowable pre-award costs.
Any application awarded in response to this FOA will be
subject to terms and conditions found on the Award
Conditions and Information for NIH Grants website.  This includes any
recent legislation and policy applicable to awards that is highlighted on this
website.
All NIH grant and cooperative agreement awards include the NIH
Grants Policy Statement as part of the NoA. For these terms of award,
see the NIH
Grants Policy Statement Part II: Terms and Conditions of NIH Grant Awards,
Subpart A: General  and Part II:
Terms and Conditions of NIH Grant Awards, Subpart B: Terms and Conditions for
Specific Types of Grants, Grantees, and Activities. More information is
provided at Award
Conditions and Information for NIH Grants.
Recipients of federal financial
assistance (FFA) from HHS must administer their programs in compliance with
federal civil rights law. This means that recipients of HHS funds must ensure
equal access to their programs without regard to a person’s race, color,
national origin, disability, age and, in some circumstances, sex and religion.
This includes ensuring your programs are accessible to persons with limited
English proficiency.  HHS recognizes that research projects are often limited
in scope for many reasons that are nondiscriminatory, such as the principal
investigator’s scientific interest, funding limitations, recruitment
requirements, and other considerations. Thus, criteria in research protocols
that target or exclude certain populations are warranted where
nondiscriminatory justifications establish that such criteria are appropriate
with respect to the health or safety of the subjects, the scientific study
design, or the purpose of the research.
For additional guidance regarding how the provisions apply
to NIH grant programs, please contact the Scientific/Research Contact that is
identified in Section VII under Agency Contacts of this FOA. HHS provides
general guidance to recipients of FFA on meeting their legal obligation to take
reasonable steps to provide meaningful access to their programs by persons with
limited English proficiency. Please see http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/civilrights/resources/laws/revisedlep.html.
The HHS Office for Civil Rights also provides guidance on complying with civil
rights laws enforced by HHS. Please see http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/civilrights/understanding/section1557/index.html;
and http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/civilrights/understanding/index.html.
Recipients of FFA also have specific legal obligations for serving qualified
individuals with disabilities. Please see http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/civilrights/understanding/disability/index.html.
Please contact the HHS Office for Civil Rights for more information about
obligations and prohibitions under federal civil rights laws at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/office/about/rgn-hqaddresses.html or call 1-800-368-1019 or TDD 1-800-537-7697. Also note it is an HHS
Departmental goal to ensure access to quality, culturally competent care,
including long-term services and supports, for vulnerable populations. For
further guidance on providing culturally and linguistically appropriate
services, recipients should review the National Standards for Culturally and
Linguistically Appropriate Services in Health and Health Care at http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/omh/browse.aspx?lvl=2&lvlid=53.
Cooperative Agreement Terms and Conditions of Award
When multiple years are involved, awardees will be required
to submit the Research
Performance Progress Report (RPPR) annually and financial statements as
required in the NIH Grants
Policy Statement.
A final progress report, invention
statement, and the expenditure data portion of the Federal Financial Report are
required for closeout of an award, as described in the NIH
Grants Policy Statement.
The Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of
2006 (Transparency Act), includes a requirement for awardees of Federal grants
to report information about first-tier subawards and executive compensation
under Federal assistance awards issued in FY2011 or later.  All awardees of
applicable NIH grants and cooperative agreements are required to report to
the Federal Subaward Reporting System (FSRS) available at www.fsrs.gov on all subawards over $25,000.  See the NIH
Grants Policy Statement for additional information on this reporting
requirement.
We encourage inquiries concerning this funding opportunity
and welcome the opportunity to answer questions from potential applicants.
eRA Service Desk (Questions regarding ASSIST, eRA Commons
registration, submitting and tracking an application, documenting system
problems that threaten submission by the due date, post submission issues)
Finding Help Online: https://grants.nih.gov/support/ (preferred method of contact)
Telephone: 301-402-7469 or 866-504-9552 (Toll Free)
Grants.gov
Customer Support (Questions
regarding Grants.gov registration and submission, downloading forms and
application packages)
Contact CenterTelephone: 800-518-4726 
    Email: support@grants.gov
GrantsInfo
(Questions regarding application instructions and process, finding NIH grant
resources)
Email: GrantsInfo@nih.gov (preferred method of contact)
Telephone: 301-945-7573
Susan T. Azrin, Ph.D.
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Telephone: 301-443-3267
Email: susan.azrin@nih.gov
David Armstrong, Ph.D.
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Telephone: 301-443-3534
Email: armstrda@mail.nih.gov
Tamara Kees
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Telephone: 301-443-8811
Email: tkees@mail.nih.gov
Recently issued trans-NIH policy
notices may affect your application submission. A full list of policy
notices published by NIH is provided in the NIH
Guide for Grants and Contracts. All
awards are subject to the terms and conditions, cost principles, and other
considerations described in the NIH Grants Policy Statement.
Awards are made under the authorization of Sections 301 and
405 of the Public Health Service Act as amended (42 USC 241 and 284) and under
Federal Regulations 42 CFR Part 52 and 45 CFR Part 75.