Seve Ballesteros at the height of his powers might just have represented the zenith in the 500 year history of the Royal and Ancient game.
He was a man who scored marks of perfection in everything from good lucks to dashing bravado, adored by both sexes alike, from golfing nuts to those who needed to scour a sporting dictionary to discover what it meant when he recorded an eagle.
Now he lies fallen, at the age of just 54. No wonder they say those whom the gods love die young.
A cut above: Seve Ballesteros takes the green jacket From Fuzzy Zoeller at the 1980 Masters
Not that he was an angel. Far from it. Anyone who ever had regular dealings with him wanted to strangle him at some point. By turns, he could be stubborn, irrational, rude, ignorant, in short as unplayable as the lies he often found himself in as another drive missed another fairway. But it is a measure of the genius within that even those whom he hurt the most are feeling desperately sad at his passing. With some people you can forgive anything, and Seve was one of them.
What he meant to European golf was obvious during the last Ryder Cup at Celtic Manor. On the Wednesday before the matches, captain Colin Montgomerie, in an inspired move, organised a conference call with the Spaniard from his home in Pedrena.
Seve only had to speak for ten minutes to leave every player choked up, and feeling like they would walk through brick walls to bring about a European victory. Ballesteros even predicted the enthralling contest ahead. 'Never forget that the sweetest wins of all are those for which you have to fight the hardest,' he told the team. To a man, when the single-point triumph had been achieved, they dedicated it to the proud senor who couldn't attend in person but who was most definitely there in spirit.
Only three golfers possess a legacy so memorable they will always be remembered simply by their given name. Think of Arnie, Tiger and Seve and you conjure up otherworldly images of open-mouthed expressions and words left unspoken on disbelieving faces: how did he do that?
I will always recall the first time I saw Seve play. It was the 1976 Open at Royal Birkdale, and I was sitting in the small stand behind the first tee, watching player after player take an iron for safety. Not a 19 year old Spaniard from a small fishing village whose name I could barely pronounce, much less recognise.
Early days: Seve Ballesteros in action at the 1976 Open at Royal Birkdale
It is fair to say that, after he walloped a driver that day over the hill that protected the left hand side of the fairway, European golf was never the same again. Instinctively, I left my seat in the stand and followed him. One of the great privileges of my professional life was to keep following him to the end.
Goodness, what times they were. My first Open as a journalist was the 1984 edition at St Andrews. Was there ever a more ecstatic champion than Seve, as he did his unforgettable clenched fist salute to all four blessed corners of the Home of Golf?
Soon Britain had its own golfing heroes, men like Ian Woosnam, Sandy Lyle and Nick Faldo, but none came close to matching the love and reverence that people reserved for Seve. In truth, he was more the family favourite than an adopted son, and how that unequivocal depth of feeling was reciprocated. Only Arnold Palmer was ever so loved, and only Arnold Palmer ever gave as much love back.
If you had to pick one event that showcased Seve in all his thrilling guises it would, of course, have to be the Ryder Cup. After the 1993 loss at The Belfry Ballesteros cut such an abject, heartbroken figure, that people forgot their own disappointment when he emerged into public view to do their best to cheer him up.
Naturally, the flipside was the string of successes that have gone down as some of the most iconic moments in any sport over the past 30 years, summed up by Seve's own words as to what went through his mind before each match began. 'I look into their eyes, shake their hand, pat their back and wish them luck,' he said, before adding the ruthless rider. 'Inside I am thinking:"I am going to bury you."'
Captain fantastic: Seve led Europe to victory in the 1997 Ryder Cup
For a game with such a white-collar reputation it is amazing how often its legends start from beginnings that barely reach the level of small.  Seve was born and lived all his life on the southern shore of the Bay of Santander, the son of a Pedrena farmer, raised in a one-storey house directly above the farm where they kept cows.
He was born in the second week of April - a symbolic time for all golfers as thoughts of the Masters signal the end of winter - and golf was in his blood. His uncle, Ramon Sota, finished sixth in the 1965 Masters. His three elder brothers all turned pro with one, Manuel, winning on the European Tour. But they all knew who was the special one.
Seve was just seven when he owned his first clubhead. He would ram sticks into the hosel to make a shaft. He would hit stones and pebbles because his brothers wouldn't let him use their precious golf balls. He would play in neighbouring fields and on the gorgeous Pedrena beach, cultivating his gift for improvisation that would one day thrill the world.
Getting expelled from school is not often a great career move, but it was in Seve's case. He had been sent home after one of his schoolbooks was inadvertently ripped. It wasn't his fault, he insisted - when was it ever, a chorus of golf administrators might add - but that didn't prevent him getting the cane. Angry and upset, he went home to an empty house. On the table was an opened bottle of wine. The 12 year old Seve glugged. Half-drunk, he returned to the school and struck the teacher who had handed out his corporal punishment. They threw him out.
So began the years of caddying in earnest, and honing his extraordinary skills until the day he turned pro in 1974 at the age of 17. By then, Manuel was already telling the British press:'One day, Seve will be better than all of us. You watch, you will see.'
Major success: Seve clinches the 1979 Open at Royal Lytham and St. Anne's
Just two years later, Manuel was being congratulated in the Birkdale clubhouse following his first round 69 in The Open, only to politely point out that it was another Ballesteros who had recorded such a score, that this was the first coming of his infinitely more talented sibling. Seve would go on to finish second that year.
So began the glory years, a spellbinding era that would see him win no less than 50 European Tour titles. To put that figure in perspective, the next best is Bernhard Langer with 42, and after that it is Colin Montgomerie with 31.
Even though he would win the order of merit on six occasions it was, as ever, the major championships and the Ryder Cup that defined him. He would win five majors in all, and in both The Open and the Masters he paved the way for the successes enjoyed by the likes of Langer, Faldo, Lyle and Woosnam. As all have acknowledged, they owed an enormous debt to the man who shattered the glass ceiling and showed that it was possible for a European to win at Augusta, and end the long spell of American domination of the Claret Jug.
Seve was just 22 when the breakthrough came, with a victory in the latter event at Royal Lytham and St Annes. The following year he went to the Masters and lapped the field. Much was rightly made of Tiger when he won by 12 in 1997 at the age of 21. But the Americans were wrong when they said we had never seen the like. Seve was not much older when he led by ten strokes with nine holes to play at that 1980 Masters. Given that no European had ever claimed a green jacket to that point, it was similarly momentous.
Holding his nerve: Seve holes out on the final green to win the Open at St Andrews in 1984
Ballesteros would win again three years later, and then came the 1984 Open. Four majors won by the age of just 27. What could stop him going on to rival Jack Nicklaus's all-time total, which stood at 17 at the time? As it turned out, it was Nicklaus himself who answered that question.
While the 1986 Masters will forever
be remembered as the time when Nicklaus turned back the years over the
rolling hills of Augusta with a back nine of 30 for the greatest of all
his wins, a footnote in the story was Ballesteros's inexplicable
collapse.
A four iron
into the water at the 15th not only cost him victory but seemingly part
of his soul. Seve was going to win that tournament for his dad, who had
died months earlier. Nothing could stop him, it was his destiny. But
something died also in Seve that day. Fully, 13 years later, I sat
opposite him in the clubhouse at Predrena, when he suddenly started
crying as he recalled that moment. A scar was made that sunlit Sunday in
Georgia that remained forever blood red.
would win only one more major, but what a triumph it turned out to be.
Back to Lytham, where he claimed the 1988 Open in the company of Nick
Price following a last round 65 that might well be the best round he
ever played. It was all there, the stunning array of shotmaking, capped
off by a little chip from the back of the 18th green that finished next
to the hole and meant victory was sealed. There is a lovely photograph
of that moment, where not only his face is filled with wonder but those
of the enthralled spectators and the watching press.
Perhaps,
in hindsight, it is not surprising that he should win a relatively
modest total of majors. It seems to be the fate of those who wear their
hearts on their sleeve. The big totals are for the those with hard,
calculating minds, for Tigers and Golden Bears. Like Arnie, Seve was
invincible for a few years but there seems to be no way of keeping the
flame burning ferociously for a long period of time. Palmer won his
seven majors during the space of seven short years; similarly, Seve
claimed five in nine.
other thing that shortened Ballesteros's time for winning majors was
surely his unique contribution to the Ryder Cup. After all, as Faldo
says, even the mightiest can only go so often to the well for
inspiration, and the Ryder Cup took plenty from Seve's life battery.
would have thought all this would happen to a man who couldn't have
cared less about the Ryder Cup after playing in it in 1979, who missed
out altogether in 1981 for reasons we need not go into here?
Tears of joy: Seve and Nick Faldo embrace following the 1995 Ryder Cup win
was the first of many strokes of genius that Tony Jacklin would make as
captain when he talked Seve round in 1983. Seve's brother Baldomero
weighed in as well. 'You have to play in it,' he said. 'The British
people love you.'
Europe
would lose that year's match in America by a single point, but Seve was
colossal, shepherding Paul Way in the group matches before playing
perhaps the best shot he ever struck to secure a half in the singles
against Fuzzy Zoeller. 'Put your heads up,' he told his team mates.
'Next time, we win.'
began 14 years when the Ryder Cup was simply the equal of any event in
sport. It was Seve who made it that way. Seve who lived every stroke,
fought every argument, who found just the right words to say in every
instance. When Bernhard Langer missed the ultimate death or glory putt, a
six-footer for the Ryder Cup in 1991, it was Seve who put his arm
around his shoulder and told him:'No man could have made that putt. The
pressure was too great.'
Conversely,
when Faldo pulled off a singles victory on the final hole in 1995 it
wasn't his wife whose arms he fell into for a joyous embrace, but
Seve's. Best of all might have been when Seve was captain in 1997, when
he drove round Valderrama in a buggy so manically he seemed to be
present at every match at the same time. Typical Seve, he had some
players, notably Darren Clarke and Woosie, wanting to knock his lights
out. But all was forgiven as he won it his way, and celebrated as only
he could.
Father and son: Seve with eldest son Baldomero in 2006
Now he is
gone after his long and characteristically brave fight against brain
cancer. When he was first diagnosed the outpouring of emotion was
extraordinary. The news that one who seemingly had everything could be
brought so low affected people in every corner of the globe. When he
appeared on television, a shell of his former self as he fought his
terrible disease, hardened men found tears were falling down their
cheeks.
battled to the end, as we all knew he would. Did he know any other way?
It was his children he thought about to the last: Baldomero, Miguel and
Carmen. What remains in the memory of Seve is little of the bitterness
of his last decade before his illness was diagnosed. His constant fights
with officialdom, the times he filled the gossip pages rather than
sporting headlines; the raging against his terrible luck with back
trouble, and the sad divorce from his beautiful wife, Carmen.
Indeed,
just one image lingers from that time. It was of Hoylake in the 2006
Open when, crippled with his career-ending back condition, he played
only because his eldest son could be by his side as caddie. He wanted
him to have one glimpse back to the time of our lives, when his father
held not only a game in thrall but sport itself. A time when one of the
oldest games of all reinvented itself with a vigour that made you
thankful simply to have been around at the same time. Somehow, Seve
rekindled that era with a 71 that defied all logic. But then, wasn't
that the story of his career?
great American man of letters Norman Mailer once wrote: 'What is genius
but balance on the edge of the impossible?' He was speaking of Muhammed
Ali. But no more fitting epitaph applies to the golfer whose death has
left us bereft.
Never forgotten: Jose Maria Olazabal (left) and Miguel Angel Jimenez observe a minutes silence in memory of Seve