23.39 An emotional Ian Poulter:
When you're wearing navy and white on Sunday you're wearing it for a reason. Olly's a special guy and it's been an amazing week. We've got Seve on the arm, and Seve on the bag. I know he's up there but he'll be the proudest man in the world right now. This is better than any win. This is special. This is huge. I need a holiday.
23.36 Our man Paul Hayward at Medinah:
Heartbreak for Captain Love. Vindication for Jose Maria Olazabal, who told Europe's players last night to "believe."
23.35 A true gent, is Bubba:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: bubba watson - Wow! What a finish. Congrats to Europe! &lt;a href="http://search.twitter.com/search?q=RyderCup" target="_blank"&gt;#RyderCup&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
23.31 Davis Love III is showing some grace after what must have been a pretty unpleasant last couple of hours:
I congratulate Olly. Seve was obviously here for that one point they needed. Not only did my boys get beat today, they played poorly. It was a good Ryder Cup. It was good for golf but not good for us.
23.28 Olly, when asked what the turning point was, says: "Today."
23.26 Europe's captain is in tears. It's been a rollercoaster weekend and the emotions have taken over. "This one's for Seve," he says.
23.24 Oh. Oh you don't want to laugh, but it's difficult sometimes. Woods misses a gimmee putt for four and Molinari wins the hole and halves the match! EUROPE NOT ONLY RETAIN THE RYDER CUP....THEY WIN IT!
23.22 Tremendous putt from Molinari that pretty much guarantees him a four, but that's won't be enough to win this hole you would have thought. Tiger lips out from just off the green.
23.20 The Americans look a tad on the unhappy side. The European fans chanting Always Look On The Bright Side Of Life maybe isn't helping....
23.18 Rory McIlroy is buzzing:
This is incredible. This is one of the most perfect days on a golf course if you're a European. The party tonight is going to be off the charts.
23.16 We've still got golf! Molinari plays a good one out of the bunker to get on the dancefloor with a chance to two-putt for a four.
23.15 The German holds his nerve. What a comeback. Here's the scene:
23.13 KAYMER GETS IT! EUROPE RETAIN THE RYDER CUP!
23.11 Stricker drains it! Kaymer has one from six feet for Europe to retain the Ryder Cup.
23.09 Pressure, my friends. It's not going to be a birdie three for Kaymer. His putt is to the right, with a bit too much on it. Both men now have par putts. Stricker is first from about eight feet.
23.07 My, oh my. We're on the 18th green with Stricker and Kaymer assessing the situation ahead of their respective putts. The pressure tells for Stricker. His radar is skewed and he gets his putt wrong. It's comfortably wide to the left. Kaymer with a putt to retain the Ryder Cup....
23.04 Not a good second shot from Molinari on the 17th. He's in the longer stuff but he puts too much on it and rolls down the hill behind the hole. Woods gets to about three feet away to go 1Up thru 17.
23.03 Great play, the German. Kaymer recovers from his position in the bunker on the right to get himself on to the green. Stricker, who split the fairway with his tee shot, rolls away to the back of the green and is in a worse position than his rival.
22.58 Molinari's tee shot on the 17th is to the right slightly and it lands just beyond the green. But it's good. It's safe. Over to Tiger. Woods is closer. He's on the edge of the green in the shorter stuff.
22.56 Sticker has won the battle of the drives on 18, but Kaymer's - in the bunker on the right - is not awful.
22.54 Molinari has got big ones. The Italian drains his putt to halve the 16th in the anchor match. They're A/S thru 16.
22.52 Ok. Here we go. Stricker with a par putt on the 17th. It's about eight feet away....But it lips out to the right! Kaymer holds his nerve and sinks his putt from four feet to go 1Up thru 17! If he hangs on, Europe win!
22.51 Ukip leader Nigel Farage weighs in on the Englishman-cheering-Europe issue:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Nigel Farage - The &lt;a href="http://search.twitter.com/search?q=rydercup2012" target="_blank"&gt;#rydercup2012&lt;/a&gt; is a clear example of why we must differentiate between the EU and Europe. I'm cheering, whilst ignoring that damned flag&lt;/noframe&gt;
22.48 Right. Here's the state of play. We've got two matches left. US need a point-and-a-half to win, but Europe only need one. As it stands Europe are retaining the Ryder Cup. These are our two matches:
Kaymer v Stricker A/S thru 16 Molinari v Woods A/S thru 15
22.45 Dufner beats Hanson 2Up. The Swede has an eight-footer to put the pressure on Dufner, but it misses to the left and The Duff only just holds on in a match he was dominating before.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Robert Lusetich - No one in the last 2 games, Stricker, Kaymer, Woods, Molinari won a point yet. Combined 0-9 this week. Now Ryder Cup's in their hands&lt;/noframe&gt;
22.42 Boom, baby! C'mon! Kaymer sinks a par putt on 16 with the pressure on! Monster from about eight feet behind the hole. Stricker, from a fairly similar distance, also does the business. They're A/S thru 16.
22.37 Argh. The tension here is ridiculous. Even a leaf doesn't play ball. Molinari throws a leaf away but it refuses to play to the script and flies back exactly where he picked it up from. Molinari, then. He has a 15-footer to win the hole.......but he pulls it right! They're A/S thru 15 after Woods holds his nerve to par.
There's no doubt this comeback has been inspired by Seve. But also our captain. What an amazing guy. He's one of the nicest guys I've ever met. Amazing. It's been a hard week and I haven't played well. I haven't felt comfortable.
22.31 It. Is. All. Going. Off. Furyk has a putt for half, he has to get it?! He doesn't. It misses right and Sergio wins 1Up! Europe lead 13-12!
22.30 Lee Westwood wins 3&2 over Kuchar! Poetic justice after Kuchar refused to concede Westwood's putt for par. He sinks the pointless par putt after his lip out for birdie. Kuchar with some fairly ordinary sportsmanship there.
22.29 Oh, no! Garcia's putt looks on target for the hole, and the win, but it comes up short and to the left.
22.28 Kaymer lips out on the 15th to hand Stricker the hole. That match is now A/S thru 15.
22.25 "Sink this, Jimmy!" hollers a lone American fan on the 18th. Furyk is just off the green from about 40+ feet with his third shot. He has a putter in his hand. It starts on course but goes left and with a fair amount behind it, it goes about eight feet the other way.
22.22 Wow! Tiger lips out with his birdie attempt on the 14th handing Molinari a chance to square the match up, with Woods currently 1Up. Molinari drains it! We're A/S thru 14!
22.20 Dufner and Hanson is dormie, with the Duff in the lead.
22.19 Looks like Sergio has won the battle of the tee shots, with Furyk beyond the bunkers on the right.
22.18 Our rugby expert Will Greenwood maps out the next couple of hours:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Will Greenwood - Sergio makes 3 at 18 and we bring the trophy home &lt;a href="http://search.twitter.com/search?q=simples" target="_blank"&gt;#simples&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
22.14 Ole, ole, ole! Furyk has a putt up the hill to halve the hole, but he pushes it to the right and Garcia wins it to leave that match A/S thru 17.
22.10 Westwood matches his European team-mate with a similar clutch putt against Kuchar on the 15th. Kuchar misses to the right with his eight-foot putt to halve the hole so Westy is 3Up thru 15.
22.09 He's got ice cold German blood in those veins, has Kaymer. He knocks home a birdie on 14 in his his match with Stricker.
22.07 Ah dear, the Tiger is back. He goes 1Up thru 13 after Molinari left his par putt too short, to hand Tiger an invitation he gleefully accepted.
22.06 Zach Johnson beats McDowell 2&1 after the first of two putts to win the match rolls to within a couple of feet.
22.03 Embarrassment for Furyk after he prematurely celebrates against Garcia. He has a 15-footer to win the hole, he lifts his arms to celebrate, but the ball tickles the rim and fails to drop. They halve the hole to leave Furyk 1Up thru 16.
22.02 Sickener for Hanson. His 15-footer stops right on the cup but refuses to turn the extra revolution. That's a par, but Dufner birdies to go 2Up thru 15
22.00 Splendid image. Rose after his putt on the 18th:
21.58 Stunning 20-foot birdie putt from Kuchar on the 14th, but Westwood is up to it and also drains his rather more simple putt, Westy is 2Up thru 14 in that one.
21.54 Advantage America. Kaymer's trip to the water means he makes a double bogey. Stricker executes a great up and down to par, win the hole, and make the match A/S thu 13.
21.53 Wise words from our very own Paul Kelso:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Paul Kelso - No question this is the best and most dramatic of all sporting formats. Every shot counts.&lt;/noframe&gt;
21.51 Tiger, looking to go all-square against Molinari, lips out with a 10-foot putt. Molinari, however, misses his own and we are A/S thru 12 in that one. Pressure. That's what it does to you.
21.49 Bad news from the 13th tee. Kaymer, 1Up over Stricker, is in the water.
21.48 Here's a factoid for you: Tiger lost to an Italian, Costantino Rocco, on his Ryder Cup debut in 1997. Would be some nice symmetery if Molinari could do the job today.
21.46 He's had a quiet week but Lee Westwood is delivering when it matters! Consecutive wins have put him 2Up thru 13 against Kuchar.
21.45 Projected scores: USA 14 - Europe 14. If it stays like this Ryder Cup is coming home!
21.44 Justin Rose is pumped. He looks delighted after that win:
To dig myself out of that game is incredible. I feel like we needed that point to have any chance. Now I know how Ian Poulter feels.
21.41Here we go, people. Rose has a birdie putt to win the 18th hole and the match...And he does it!!! What nerves! Wins 1Up!
21.40 Our man Paul Hayward at Medinah:
This morning I thought we could live with one anti-climax after the Olympics, Wiggins, Murray. Then Europe came off the ropes in Chicago..
21.36 Bad news from the 14th where Furyk drains a putt to go 1Up against Garcia.
21.34 Ooooh, Mickelson has made a mess of his second shot on the par-four 18th. It's gone way too big. Here's Rose over in the rough on the left......And he makes the green! Great shot! He'll have around 15 feet to play with to win the hole, and the match.
21.33 Ah dear. Colsaerts can't hang in there and he loses 3&2 to Dustin Johnson.
21.32 Here's a very happy Ian Poulter. He believes. Do you?
Looking at this leaderboard we've got an unbelievable chance. This Ryder Cup is not for the faint-hearted.
21.30 Mickelson tees off on the 18th as his match with Rose reaches a thrilling crescendo..
21.28 "This could happen here," says Monty. And why not after Rose produces a quite majestic putt to go all square against Mick on the 17th. We're down to the last hole!
21.25 Oh yes! It's 10-10 on the scoreboard now! The Postman has delivered! Poults wins 2Up!
It is the most worried I have ever been driving to the golf course. If I had let down these boys I would have never forgiven myself. I'm happy to get the point and help the cause out of it. I was in a police car! I got here with about 10 minutes to spare.
21.22 Over on the 13th Garcia has just drained an eight-footer to square up his game with Furyk! He cups his ear at the gallery. This is getting spicy.
21.19 Right, we're on the 17th, where McIlroy has just missed a monster 15-footer to win the match. It doesn't matter though because Bradley misses his putt too! IT'S ANOTHER POINT FOR EUROPE! McIlroy wins 2&1!
21.18 Hello, it's Nick Pearce again, with Europe just two behind on the scoreboard.
2114 The 16th is shared, and McIlroy's 2Up with two to play. Lawrie - who has played as well as anyone today is about to wrap up his match, after a lovely approach on 15. It'd be fitting if he ends with a birdie - he's already had eight today. And that's the ball game! Lawrie beats Snedeker 5&3! "Kleenex required" he says.
2105 That's an incredible escape from Rose! His second bunker shot, from an x-rated lie, is two feet away, and Mickelson's birdie putt leaks to the left of the cup, so it's halved in 4. Mickelson 1Up vs Rose thru 15.
2104 This 17th is brutal today. The pond in front of the green suddenly looks the size of Lake Michigan, and the wind ain't helping either. Nerveless, Poulter flushes his mid-iron tee shot which is over the flag all the way. He's got 14 foot for birdie. And Simpson, who takes an age over his response, finds Luke Donald's bunker on the left. Advantage Poults.
2059 Gusty and gallant, Poulter gets up and down from a decidely unfriendly spot beneath the 16th hole, and that's an unlikely - and very, very welcome - half against Simpson. Over to 17 they go! Bad news for Rose though, who's left it in the greenside trap on 15. Mickelson about to go 2 Up there, you fear.
2056 Will Mickelson go for the green on 15? Do golfers vote Romney? It's a good 3-wood too, and is just short of the putting surface. It's 309yds today, and it's a 3-wood for Rose too, who's in the greenside trap. Mickelson made birdie on the par 5 14th and is 1Up now. He's five under today in a high-quality rubber.
2052 Incredible recovery from Bradley! Wow. From the downslope he hits a perfect lob shot that lands soft and deft. But he can't make the eight-foot putt for birdie! And Rory will have this for a crucial two-shot lead. IN IT GOES! McIlroy 2Up through 15.
2049 Is that a fatal error from Bradley? With the tee up, he goes for the risk-and-reward par 4 15th, but his drive is wide - way left. And that's big trouble. Rory laid up (7 iron) , and his pitch is brilliant - he's stone dead for birdie!
2043 Latest scores - US only up in two matches!
L. Donald Wins 2 & 1 B. Watson  I. Poulter AS thru 14 W. Simpson  R. McIlroy 1Up thru 14 K. Bradley  J. Rose AS thru 13 P. Mickelson  P. Lawrie 5Up thru 13 B. Snedeker  N. Colsaerts AS thru 13 D. Johnson G. McDowell 2Dn thru 11 Z. Johnson  S. Garcia AS thru 10 J. Furyk  P. Hanson 4Dn thru 9 J. Dufner  L. Westwood 1Up thru 9 M. Kuchar  M. Kaymer AS thru 7 S. Stricker  F. Molinari AS thru 7 T. Woods
2040 McIlroy makes it, and leads in match three. And hello - this is what Europe really need. Excellent from Garcia, who is AS with Furyk now, breaking up that big chunk of red in the middle of the scoreboard. Three under today, Garcia after that sensational eagle on the 10th. Garcia A/S with Furyk thru 10.
2036 Advantage McIlroy on the 14th as Bradley chips out of one greenside bunker and straight into another. And McIlroy is six feet away as he flops out!
2029 Next three matches to come in are all square. Poulter vs Simpson, Rory v Keegan, and Rose v Mickelson. If Europe can win two of those three, Lawrie (4Up) is a banker, so that would be 11-10 on the board. Interesting.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Ian Chadband - US commentator watches Poulter refuse to concede putt &amp;amp; describes him splendidly as a cross between Rod Stewart and Sid Vicious&lt;/noframe&gt;
2024 Donald talking after his excellent win over Watson. "I don't know what I would have done going down 18 because it's pretty noisy out there. Nice to hit that bunker shot (on 17), because it was unexpected that Bubba holed his shot on 16. We need a miracle, but it's good to get some blue on the board."
Superb win, that, from Donald, who has plenty of friends in Chicago but knockers all over America. Jack Nicklaus on comms earlier questioned his No.1 ranking (which he's held at times over the last couple of years) as said, in short, that you can't be a great player if you haven't won a major. He was talking to Monty at the time. Bit awkward.
2019. Stunning bunker shot from Donald! Three feet away and conceded. Bubba needs to chip in again, but his effort is short. Donald beats Watson 2&1!
2018 On the 17th, both Bubba and Donald miss the green. Bubba right, Luke long and left. Watson's short-sided himself, and will have a nasty downhill lie for his chip, so it's probably advantage Donald, given that both men will do well to make par there. Donald just needs a half for the first point of the day.
2014 Donald has a putt to win the match after Bubba, brilliantly, chips in on 16. His chipping has been erratic today but that was outstanding. One of the shots of the day, but you'd back Donald to put him away. Donald 2Up through 16. On the par 3 13th, the superpumped Keegan is long, just, and Rory is pin-high.
2012 Jason Dufner - The Wagglemaster - as Butch Harmon calls him, looks like the USA's best chance of a banked point. He's 3Up against Peter Hanson and playing beautifully. Have enjoyed watching him play all year, fantastic ball striker
2008 McIlroy pays the price for missing the 12th green on the wrong (left) side. That left him a treacherous 70ft chip across the green, from where he needed three to get down. All square in match three.
2003 That's the very best of Mickelson. From the trees on 11, he makes birdie to square up his match with Rose. Brilliant.
1955 EUROPE CHARGE! Poulter has levelled his match against Simpson. And Rose leads Mickelson! Top of the leaderboard is Blue, A/S, Blue, Blue, Blue, Blue. Chicago - home of the blues! This is a better email from William Hargreaves. "I was once late for a business meeting. No big deal until, as all eyes around the table were looking my way in scorn, I pulled a tissue out of my pocket to blow my nose and a used condom dangled down from within it." Eeeeeeeeeeeeeugh.
1950 Superb scrambling from Rory, who was in trouble off the tee but recovered to make a four against Keegles. Who may well be a candidate for the Hunter Mahan cry-baby role if he doesn't deliver a point today. He is so overpumped. And Rory, as befitting a man who was watching breakfast TV in his pants about an hour ago, still seems very laidback in comparison. Rory 1Up thru 11
1944 So apart from Donald (4Up) and Lawrie (3Up) every match is eminently swingable. Which is to say that Europe are not out of any of the 12. So as we stand, Chicago could yet witness the biggest daylight robbery since the days of Capone. Email from John Mackie re punctuality. "I once left my office in downtown Singapore at 7.30pm for an 8.00pm departure to Tokyo. I actually made it. And the plane also left on time." Not that embarrassing, really John.
1943 Haha, good from Francesco, and Tiger's enjoyable week in Chicago just keeps on giving. Molinari is 2 Up thru 3! Westwood, who's also had a shocker, is enjoying the singles more - he leads Kuuuuuuuuuuuchar 1Up thru 4. Bubba's poor putting continues to cost him, Donald finds the water on 13 but still halfs the hole in 4 after getting up and down from the drop zone. Zero chance of a Bubba revival if he let's those chances slip.
19.37 Hats off to Paul Lawrie. Two birdies and an eagle and he's out in 32 against Snedeker, who simply can't live with him. Lawrie 3Up thru 9. Tiger - remember him - misses his par putt on 1, and that's a chance for Molinari to go 2 Up.
19.32 Get the feeling that Simpson vs Poulter will be the first match to go down 18. It's a 4 on the par 5 10th to take the lead against vs Poults.
"I would LOVE it, LOOOOOVE it"
19.30 Brilliant from Donald. 4 Up thru 14 now against Bubba, and he's been solid as a rock from the first tee, which he flushed down the middle before Bubba went wide. The Masters champion hasn't putted well - he missed an eight-footer there - and Donald sank another short one for the win.
19.25: Mickelson's got his mojo working. He's all square now with Rose after a stunning tee shot to the par 3 eighth. And after J-Ro hits a great approach on 9, Lefty follows him with a pitch that spins back and narrowly missed the cup. They'll both have short birdie putts there on 9. We now have all 12 matches out there, and the Bid Light is kicking in stateside. It's getting nice and loud.
19.22 Would love your emails tonight. How are you feeling? Who do you fancy? And on a Rory theme, what's the most embarrassing thing you've ever been late for?? I once calculated the 90-mile trip from Nottingham to Luton as an hour's drive and missed a flight. That was my first ever holiday with my girlfriend. #Player. Email michael.norrish@telegraph.co.uk with your own punctuality fails
19.15: Score updates. Dufner is 1UP v Hanson. Johnson 1UP v Colsaerts in the battle of the bombers. Better news from McDowell though, who reduces the damage against Johnson to 2. Brilliantly, Donald is now 3UP vs Bubba after 11, so that's looking like a vital point against one of Love's bankers this week.
19.10 Keegan Bradley really is a tool. But he can't half putt. He drains a long birdie effort on the ninth against McIlroy and struts towards the crowd Hulk Hogan-style. Which, of course, they love. He's styled himself as the American Ian Poulter, which is a very strange thing to aspire to. Rory will have a chance to half that hole in a tick.
19.06 Hello all, Mike Norrish here then for a couple of hours. And there's ONLY ONE RED on the leaderboard now! McDowell is 3Down against Zach Johnson, elsewhere it's all blue or AS. Current projected scores Eur 12.5 USA 13.5.
19.01 Oh bad luck, Simpson. His putt from the edge of the green is so close to dropping in but it wasn't quite on the right path. He'll bogey that hole handing Poulter a four-footer to go all-square. He's done it!! Fist-pumping, eyes bulging, it's A/S thru 8 in that match.
18.58 Take a bow, Simpson. He completely shanked his tee shot on the par-three eighth into the trees but, with no view of the green, gets it on to set up a par putt. Fair play.
18.57 Big moment in match three between Bradley and McIlroy. The American rookie concedes for par after he misreads his 25-footer from the edge of the green. Sets up a putt for Rors to drain to go three-up, but he can't do the business. McIlroy remains 2Up thru 7.
18.52 Simpson's tee shot on the eighth is deep into the trees. Chance for Poults to go all-square?
18.51 It's not been the best weekend for Lee, has it?
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Rick Reilly - Somebody just hollered at the first tee to Lee Westwood: "we can go get Colsearts if you need somebody to carry you, lee!"&lt;/noframe&gt;
18.47 Cracking eagle-three on the fifth from Lawriee. He's been on great form this weekend despite not delivering a point. All alone with his own ball, is he about to add one to the tally for the Europeans? He's 2Up thru 5.
18.44 Projected scores are currently: USA 13 1/2 - Europe 11 1/2
18.42 Here's picture-based evidence of how good that McIlroy chip was... This went in!
18.40 What a shot from McIlroy! He chips in from off the green to register his third birdie in a row and win the sixth. He's 2Up v Bradley thru 6.
18.36 Massive task for Donald today to get some early blue on the board, and he has a 15-footer on the eighth to try and go three up. It looks a little off-target but rolls tantalisingly close to the right of the cup before skipping away. Donald remains 2Up thru 8.
18.35 Shot of the day contender from Lawrie! He chips one in on the par-four three from off the green for a stunning birdie to notch up his first win. He's 1Up v Snedker thru 4
18.32 Difficulties for Poulter continuing in match two against Simpson. He misses the sort of putt he was draining yesterday to go 2 down thru 6.
18.30 That hole is halved after a three-footer from Watson to leave Donald 2Up thru 7.
18.27 Top wedge from Donald on the par-five seventh lands in a cracking position but the backspin sends it to about 20 feet shy of the hole. He'll have a big putt for birdie in that first match against Bubba.
18.26 Too early, Gary:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Gary Lineker - American crowd have quietened. Keep it that way.&lt;/noframe&gt;
18.19 "God, that is so bad," sighs Bradley after his second shot on the fifth sails way wide of the green and into some rough beyond the bunkers to the right.
18.18 Personalised footy shirts and kilts. Well in, boys
18.17 There it is! Poulter with a clutch putt to cut the deficit in his match against Simpson, who is 1Up v Poulter thru 5.
18.15 The standard of golf from the Americans was something to behold on first two days but they are not firing on all cylinders yet after about 70 minutes or so of golf. Europe need to raise their game but if they do, then this doesn't have to be a foregone conclusion. Bubba has a five-footer to win the sixth hole and claw back a point for the US... He doesn't though! And that my friends is case in point. Donald 2 Up v Watson thru 6.
18.09 Bad news from the first. Europe are down in match six after a lacklustre bit of putting from Nicolas Colsaerts in his match against Dustin Johnson. Johnson is 1Up thru 1.
18.06 Here at Telegraph Towers we've just about recovered from the shock of McIlroy's time zone gaffe. And it looks like he has as well. His second shot on the par-four fourth gets him to well within birdie territory in his match against Bradley, who is in a spot of bother after his second.
18.02 Hmmmm. Poulter concdes on the fourth green to go two-down against Simpson after missing a par-putt. The talisman has time on his side but if he carries on like this there's a possibility that the Postman might not deliver.
18.00 Right, over to match one, which is at the fifth green. Donald completely fluffs a putt with a chance to go three-up. That doesn't happen very often but he's still 2Up v Watson thru 5.
17.57 Lawrie recovers with his third shot, chipping out of the bunker and into banker-par territory about three or four feet away from the pin.
17.55 Match five is under way between Paul Lawrie and Brandt Snedeker, with the European in a bunker just to the right in front of the green.
17.53 The worst possible example of Lombardi Time from McIlroy has irked Sir Clive Woodward:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Sir Clive Woodward - Cannot stop thinking Mcllroy being late - surprised team does not stay &amp;amp; travel together , he will handle it but the effect on others ?&lt;/noframe&gt;
17.50 Good news for Olazábal as Donald extends his lead after sinking his three-footer to birdie the fourth. Donald 2Up v Watson thru 4.
17.49 Europe's talisman Poutler narrowly escapes going two-down after Simpson missed one. Simpson is 1Up v Poulter thru 3.
17.47 Few putts not dropping out there, despite the high standards the Americans have set this weekend. One that does land is Rose's on the 1st! He drains a 10-footer to go 1Up v Mickelson thru 1.
17.43 RORY WATCH: He misses the green with his tee shot on the second. You can't blame his late arrival though because Bradley, who pitched up at 4am doing press ups and star jumps while mainlining wheatgrass, also misses it.
17.39 Unbelievably, Poulter has just missed a putt in match two to fall behind to Simpson. So, fittingly, the scoreboard is red, white and blue.
17.38 Mickelson and Rose are under way in match four with two brilliant tee shots. Meanwhile, in match three, the first hole ends all-square. Mcilroy & Bradley A/S thru 1.
17.36 There's so much brilliant reaction to McIlroy's tardiness. This image of Rory munching on a breakfast bar and hugging his captain is up there with the best though:
17.34 Donald missed a birdie putt on the third to give Bubba an opportunity to draw all-square, but Bubba rolls it wide from just under 10 feet. Donald 1Up v Watson thru 3.
17.32 A momentarily terrified Olazábal describes the terror of McIlroy's late arrival:
All of a sudden we realised Rory was not here. My heart was beating quicker than expected
17.31 The second shot from Poulter left him well short of the green but this man is on untouchable form so it hardly matters. He pitches his shot, it catches the flag stick, and drops in for par. Simpson, not wanting to be undone, sinks a 17-footer to leave Poulter & Simpson A/S thru 1
17.28 Blue! Donald birdies to win the par-three second to provide the scoreboard with its first splash of colour. Donald 1Up v Watson thru 2.
17.27 He's arrived late and it's resulted in a not particularly brilliant tee shot from Rory. His ball is nestled in some television cables after sailing hard to the right. Bradley's effort looks like one from a man who was here nice and early and nailing 440ml cans of Relentless.
17.25 Great chirp, this:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Paul Hayward - Fans chanting "central time zone" at McIlroy, who spreads his arms.&lt;/noframe&gt;
17.23 Ironic cheers from the gallery for the tardy McIlroy. Will it hamper his form?
17.21 Some more detail on the appearance of Pep Guardiola from Jonathan Liew at Medinah:
Currently on sabbatical in New York after resigning as Barcelona manager, Guardiola is a keen golf fan and a friend of Sergio Garcia. Could he be a future European captain? You'd have to hope not: his method would probably involve putting the ball slowly up the fairway until an opening develops.
17.20 Deep discussion between Poulter and his caddy as he mulls over his second shot on the first hole. All in vain though as he's well short of the green. In a bit of trouble now...
17.18 We're hearing reports that Rory McIlroy overslept after confusing Eastern time (NY, Washington DC etc) with Central time (Chicago) and needed a police escort to get to the course on time. Here he is:
17.14 Decent enough tee shot from Poulter. It fades a little to the right and misses the fairway but it's safe. Better effort from Webb Simpson, who makes it. We'll be watching this one closely.
17.13 Sublime putt from the edge of the green by Bubba! It looked as if he hadn't put enough behind it but it gathered pace and straightened up brilliantly. He birdies the first. Now for Donald's response... It's a straightforward putt and he birdies too so Watson & Donald are A/S thru 1.
17.12 Hard to argue with Tiger's logic if this report is accurate....
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Adam Schupak - BBC radio says Tiger walking with Bubba's group. Guess he's not expecting his match to matter.&lt;/noframe&gt;
17.11 Donald gets to under 10 feet of the pin with his second shot and has a perfect chance of getting a nice dollop of blue on the board early on.
17.09 Bubba's tee shot went hard right but he's recovered well to land on the green and give himself half a chance of sneaking a birdie on the par-four first.
17.08 Ian Poutler arrives at the tee to the strains of There's Only One Ian Poulter.
17.07 More from Oliver Brown at Medinah:
Pep Guardiola is on the frist tee at Medinah. Close friend of José María Olazábal..
17.04 Donald tees off first and it's straight down the middle. Cracking start for the European. What's Bubba got? He's pumping up the crowd and gets them cheering for the swing. He salutes the grandstand after his swing but it's not one of his classics. The ball is hooked to the right and into the gallery.
17.03 Luke Donald has joined Bubba at the tee and the crowd are doing their best 'oooooooooooh' every time the players do a practice swing. Right, time for quiet. LET'S GET IT ON!
17.01 The great Jack Nickalus with a prediction:
I think the American team will win but it's going to be a heck of a day. I am really into it.
17.00 Our man Oliver Brown from Medinah:
Febrile atmosphere here at Medinah. 'Rock star' Keegan Bradley has been on the first tee as warm-up act, whipping up the frenzy.
16.59 Bubba has arrived at the tee, to huge cheers, and he marks his arrival by taking off his cap and giving it to lucky young fan in the crowd. He's hard to dislike, isn't he?
16.56 Here's a reminder of what happened at the death that day at Brookline:
16.53 There's been a lot of talk about Brookline today. In 1999 the Americans overcame a 10-6 deficit to stun the Europeans. Ben Crenshaw, the US captain, was derided for saying he had a "good feeling" about the singles, but his team won 8 1/2 - 3 1/2 for a stunning victory.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Golfweek Forecaddie - First tee chant: WE WANT BEER!!!!&lt;/noframe&gt;
16.44 Twenty minutes until tee-off and already the crowd is going barmy whenever they catch a glimpse of the American team. I'm a big fan of the breakfast beer (Yuengling a good choice if you're Stateside) and it's possible a few of the gallery have indulged already today...
16.41 Interesting graphic from Sky here. Four European players have yet to contribute to their team, while the hapless pair of Stricker and Woods are also pointless:
16.35 We've got just under half an hour to go. Here's some words from Jose Maria Olazabal to inspire you:
I believe, yeah, that it's not over. That's what I learned from Seve, and that's what I'm going to try to pass to the players. It's not over until it's over. There are 12 matches to be played. Of course we have a tough task ahead, but it's not over - as simple as that.
16.33 Do you believe? It won't surprise you to learn that Poulter does:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Ian Poulter - Seve was watching over us this afternoon &amp;amp; I feel it could be the biggest comeback Europe have ever had. We have nothing to lose. Give 100%&lt;/noframe&gt;
16.30 Here are the singles line-ups for you:
Final day singles (all times BST)
17.03 Bubba Watson v Luke Donald  17.14 Webb Simpson v Ian Poulter  17.25 Keegan Bradley v Rory McIlroy  17.36 Phil Mickelson v Justin Rose  17.47 Brandt Snedeker v Paul Lawrie 17.58 Dustin Johnson v Nicolas Colsaerts  18.09 Zach Johnson v Graeme McDowell  18.20 Jim Furyk v Sergio Garcia  18.31 Jason Dufner v Peter Hanson  18.42 Matt Kuchar v Lee Westwood  18.53 Steve Stricker v Martin Kaymer  19.04 Tiger Woods v Francesco Molinari
16.25 Good afternoon and thanks for joining us for the final session of the 39th Ryder Cup. Late last night it looked as if the United States were well on their way to emphatically reclaiming the trophy but an inspirational late rally from Ian Poulter and Rory McIlroy has handed Europe a glimmer of hope.
Today they line up in their Seve Ballesteros-inspired navy and white full of belief that they can overturn an imposing 10-6 deficit and silence the beery Medinah crowd. It looks a tall order, but then it didn't look likely that Poutler and McIlroy would win a point yesterday. But they did. It promises to be an absolutely fascinating evening of golf.