The SK Gaming roster has won their second consecutive Counter-Strike: Global Offensive major, after single-handedly taking down Team Liquid in an extremely one sided final.
The ESL One Cologne 2016 event was packed with some nail biting action, as we saw Team Liquid (the hope for NA) slowly defeat the best european teams one-by-one resulting in event setting multiple records as the finals consisted of only American teams (South America and North America) for the first time in its history.
While we are talking about upsets, for the first time in history, Ninjas in Pyjamas are no longer under Legendary status, meaning they will have to compete via the qualifiers if they wish to attend the next major.
For SK Gaming, the weekend could not have gone better as, aside from lifting that giant trophy,  player Marcelo “coldzera” David received the ESL Cologne MVP award as his rating was through the roof in all of his games, not to mention that not once did it drop below a positive score. In the final he had a 1.59 rating on Train and 1.57 on Cobblestone.
It’s time to dive into the statistics and results for the Grand Final.
These map picks could have gone a little better for Liquid, however we did expect SK to remove de_cache as its one of their stronger maps, and in return Liquid managed to remove de_overpass which is not something you would want to face SK on.
Train was an “ok-ish” pick for Liquid, it’s one of the better maps in the series and they should be expected to do decently if they were on point. Second map was de_cbble, one Team Liquid should be expected to win on. If they are unable to win on cobble it will all be over, which it was.
Now it’s time to dive into the things that were wrong with the event and the problem CS:GO faces. This event had one of the lowest viewerships of a major event I have seen in a while, with the final being extremely so bland that I even fell asleep. The scoreline was so one sided people were getting bored, with map one being 16-7 and map two being 16-6, the lowest scoreline in a major.
The next few points are opinion based (Disclaimer here):
Enough with the negative, this event was still packed with action and upsets. It was enjoyable to watch the North American hype train build as they took down teams, along with every team having fans rooting for them and the event still housing thousands of fans.