And Ward becomes the FIFTH Brit into the second round. Yes, do not avert your eyes. FIVE Britons are into the second round of the Championships. Ward wins the fourth set 6-3 to book his spot in the second round.
He's only gone and done it!! Bedene, our latest Brit, has just joined Murray, Watson and Broady in the second round - beating Stepanek 7-5, 1-6, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4.
Ward eventually cements the break by saving a couple of break points to take a 4-2 lead in the fourth. Incredible scenes over on Court 8 where Bedene has broken and is serving for the match against Stepanek.
Ward has broken to move 3-2 ahead in the fourth set against Vanni. There's nothing between Bedene and Stepanek in the fifth. Stepanek leads 4-3, but it remains on serve.
Brit Watch: Ward has taken a two sets to one lead over Vanni, taking the third set 6-4. Bedene-Stepanek is with serve in the deciding set at 1-1.
Former world No 1 Wozniacki is safely through to the second round, beating Zheng 7-5, 6-0.
.@Gael_Monfils slides into the 2R with a 6-4, 6-4, 7-5 win over Pablo Carreno Busta. Next up: Mannarino or Berrer pic.twitter.com/8VkOhl7fbu
Tomorrow's order of play has just been released and sees world No 1 Novak Djokovic open up against Finland's Jarkko Nieminen on Centre Court at 1pm. Fifth seed Kei Nishikori will take on Colombia's Santiago Giraldo before Serena Williams faces Hungary's Timea Babos. Seventh seed Milos Raonic opens proceedings on Court One against veteran Tommy Haas before British No 1 Heather Watson plays for the third consecutive day when she goes up against Daniela Hantuchova. A fully clothed Stan Wawrinka will take on Victor Estrella Burgos in the third match of the day. Britain's Liam Broady, meanwhile, will take on 16th seed David Goffin in the first match on Court 3 which will get underway at 11.30am.
Up for singles tomorrow at 11:30 on the colosseum that is court 3. Are court tickets needed to get on?? #MoreSeatsMoreNoise #Excited
Bedene wanted to let Britain know exactly what kind of talent it has inherited when he spoke ahead of today's clash with Stepanek. Well, he's really treating the fans on Court 8. The British No 2 has won the fourth set 6-3 to take the match into a decider.
This is Stan Wawrinka like you've never seen him before. 'Stanimal' as he is affectionately known, bears all in the latest edition of ESPN's The Body magazine.
"This was more about the challenge for myself," Wawrinka said. "I'm not the kind of guy to do these pictures, but (the magazine issue) puts the athlete first, the sport first. I'm happy I did it. It made me a little bit nervous, but in general it was a great experience for me."
The first thing that struck me? Oooh, look at those tan lines.
BRIT WATCH: Ward has broken early in the third set on Court 12 in the still glorious sunshine over SW19. Ward, who has his outfits designed and made by Ted Baker, appears to have a red trim running around his collar. Surely that's a big no-no. Where are the fashion police? They were there giving Bouchard a dressing down for her black bra earlier. To be fair to Ward and Ted Baker, they have toned it down from his outfit at Nottingham.
Woznacki has fought back from an early wobble to win the first set of her clash with Zheng 7-5. Ward has levelled his clash with Vanni while Stepanek is serving to take a two sets to one lead against Bedene. Tomas Berdych is racing through his clash with Jeremy Chardy, taking the opening set 6-2. There's plenty of action still going on, 25th seed Alize Cornet is only now getting her clash with Ana Konjuh underway.
Back to the Brits, and Ward is fighting back in the second. After losing the first set, he now leads Vanni 5-1 in the second. Bedene, meanwhile, has been broken in the third set and is 4-3 down against Stepanek.
Sergiy Stakhovsky, remember the name? He was the one who knocked out Roger Federer in 2013, but today he came a cropper to 18-year-old Borna Coric. Well, thankfully, he took the five-sets defeat in which he lost the decider 9-7 in good grace.
And the prize CHOKER of @Wimbledon goes......to....... ME!!!!
That certainly is our tweet of the day. And seeing as he took defeat so well, let's allow him his glory moment again...
Flamboyant Frenchman Gael Monfils is cruising in his first-round clash with Spain's Pablo Carreno Busta. The 18th seed is two sets to love up against a player who has never moved past the first round of SW19.
Here's a great - albeit scary - image of Monfils in action.
Ward has just lost the opening set tie-break against Vanni while, could we see a third big name topple in the women's draw? Wozniacki, having been moved over to Centre, is 4-2 down in the first set against Zheng.
Murray will face world No 73 Robin Haase in the second round on Thursday. The Dutchman dispatched of Alejandro Falla in four sets. Murray has won four of their five head-to-heads with their most recent clash coming in the first round of the US Open last year which the British No 1 won in four sets. Haase's sole victory came all the way back in 2008 in their first-ever encounter at the Rotterdam Open.
Bedene loses the second set against Stepanek 6-1. Ward's clash with Vanni, meanwhile, is into a first-set tie-break.
18-year-old @borna_coric picks up his 1st ever #Wimbledon win, overcoming some cramp to edge past Sergiy Stakhovsky 4-6, 7-6, 6-2, 1-6, 9-7
Former world No 1 Caroline Wozniacki has been upgraded to Centre Court after Kvitova, Federer and, to a point, Murray raced through their matches. The Dane was due to be on Court No 2, but has been moved over to THE main show court. Wozniacki is taking on China's Saisai Zheng.
From the highs to the lows. After winning the opening set, Bedene is 4-0 down in the second to Stepanek. Ward's clash with Vanni is on serve in the first set, locked at four-all.
Topsy-turvy: After winning the first set, the second is running away from Bedene
Another seed has tumbled in the women's draw. Half-an-hour after Bouchard crashed out, former French Open finalist and last year's semi-finalist at SW19 Halep has joined her on the scrapheap. Slovakian Cepelova, down at world No 106, has held her nerve to come from 40-15 down to close out the match and win 5-7, 6-4, 6-3.
Simona Halep (seeded 3rd) is the 1st top 3 seed to crash out in R1 of #Wimbledon women's singles since Martina Hingis (#1) in 2001.
Game, set, match Murray in straight sets. Meanwhile, we have another woman in deep, deep trouble. Third seed Simona Halep is one set all and 5-3 down in her first-round clash with Jana Cepelova.
C'MON BEDENE. The Slovenian-born 25-year-old has taken the first set off Stepanek 7-5. Murray, is 5-4 up and serving for the match over on Centre. Another Brit will soon be in action with James Ward warming up for his clash with Italy's Luca Vanni. Warming-up really is the wrong term of phrase on a day like today.
Brit watch II: Murray is cruising in the third set but we have another Briton joining him in the action. Aljaž Bedene makes his Wimbledon debut as a bona fide Brit and is taking on veteran Radek Stepanek over on Court 8. It's on serve currently in the first set at 5-5.
BOUCHARD IS OUT!! Last year's finalist becomes the biggest casualty in either side of the draw, losing to qualifier Duan in straight sets 7-6, 6-4. Bouchard will drop out of the world top 20 as a result of this latest defeat. The 13th seed Agnes Radwanska, meanwhile, is through after being the Czech Republic's Lucie Hradecka in straight sets.
See ya! Bouchard crashes out in the first round
Bouchard is holding her own in the second set of her clash with Duan. It remains locked at four-all after the Canadian dropped the first set.
The No 12 seed was also handed a dress code violation for wearing a black bra under her white vest. I am not joking.
Louise Engzell calls in a dress code violation on Bouchard; she has a black bra visible underneath her white bra. #fashionpolice #Wimbledon
Murray wins the tie-break and takes two sets to love lead over Kukushkin.
Kim Sears cheers on her hubby
Laura Robson says she will take part in a few challenger events in America and Canada following her first-round defeat.
After an 18-month lay-off it would've been a bigger story today had she made it into the second round, but when asked how she felt returning to the locker room, Robson, at the grand old age of 21, said she felt old!
There's definitely players that I didn't recognise, especially when I was training at the National Centre last week and I went out to watch the qualifying. There was a bunch of people who made me feel real old. There were (players born in) '97s and '98s. I don't know how that makes you feel, but I feel ancient!
Murray breaks back to level and has taken Kukushkin to second set tiebreak.
Murray has slipped from 5-2 up in the second set to trail 6-5 and with Kukushkin now serving to level the match. If you like, you can follow the blow-by-blow account here, or you can stay with me and our rolling blog and I'll keep you up to date with the main talking points.
Nadal has turned the fact he is the tenth seed at Wimbledon, his lowest for a decade, into a positive thing - calling it a "great number".
I am No 10 because I deserve to be No 10. That's what happens with one‑year rankings. When you are injured for six months and you come back and you are not able to play great, No 10 is a great number. With six months of points in the computer for me and without saying that that six months that I am playing, more than a half I was playing terribly, and the rest was not fantastic. So to be No 10 is fantastic news.
Oooooh, er. Last year's finalist Eugenie Bouchard has lost the opening set of her clash with Ying-Ying Duan - a player down at 117 in the world rankings - and a qualifier here. The Canadian has already served up SIX double faults and is struggling with her first serve big time. She's been out of sorts since crumbling to Kvitova in the final at SW19 last year and it wouldn't be the biggest shock if she did crash out today. She's having that kind of year.
2014 #Wimbledon finalist #Bouchard continues to struggle, drops opening set to Duan in a tiebreak. #ESPNTennis pic.twitter.com/XgsjiiCJ58
The big casualty in the men's draw today has been that of 31 seed Jack Sock who was beaten by Australia's Sam Groth. I probably shouldn't mention the fact that he was in our '10 men to watch outside the Big Four' for this year's Championships. Not that I expected him to go all the way to the final or anything but I was confident he would make it into the second week at least. What do I know?
Sock it to him: America's Jack Sock was beaten in the first round
Serena and Venus Williams have withdraw from the women's doubles - a title they have won five times. No reason has been given for their decision - although they did also pull out of the doubles at the Aussie Open back in January too.
The sisters could be on course to face each other in the fourth round of the singles draw.
Read Daniel Schofield's match report on the contrasting fortunes for Watson and Robson today. Watson's win, means she is one win away from a potential showdown with world No 1 Serena Williams.
Federer was asked in his post-match interview whether he wanted a similar heat-rule brought in for the men which is in place for the women.
The WTA allow a 10-minute break between the second and third sets of matches which can be used when temperatures rise above 30.1C.
But Federer, in true Federer fashion, isn't too fussed.
I don't know their rule, to be honest. I almost don't want to know it. I'm just happy the way we have it. Isn't it the discretion of the supervisor or the umpire maybe. I've had no problems whatsoever in all these matches, all these years that I've played.
"It's hard when it's 20 degrees throughout, then all of a sudden it spikes to 40. That's hard for us, no doubt. But I think if they make a heat rule, it's almost for everybody around us, as well. Eventually it's not comfortable sitting eight hours in that kind of a heat for everybody, I guess. For us it's just an hour two, three, four max, I'd say. Today was perfect conditions."
Federer was also asked what he'd like to do when he finishes playing. His response: "I'd like to drive the kids to school. I'd like to spend time with them, my wife, live in Switzerland."
Over on Centre and Murray has won the opening set against Kukushkin 6-4. You can follow all the details here...
Great stuff from Watson there and she'll play Daniela Hantuchova in the second round. Vicki Hodges here now, taking over from Alistair to take you through the late afternoon early evening goings on at SW19. It's a sweltering day down there and I can vouch for it. I was fortunate to be on Court One for the first set of Rafa Nadal's comfortable win and took in quite a bit of Laura Robson's defeat too. Not that I'm boasting or anything, it's just a fact. Please let me hear your predictions for the men and women's draws. Who are you backing? Email me your thoughts at vicki.hodges@telegraph.co.uk
On the way: Watson celebrates her win
She's done it! Heather Watson has beaten 32 seed Caroline Garcia 1-6, 6-3, 8-6! What a performance and what a win!
Heather Watson's match is all over the place. Three breaks in a row means Watson again gets the chance to serve for the match. Thrilling stuff!
Murray's match is going with serve so far. And he's wearing a cap. Follow that clash here
Tsonga has won but it has taken him three hours and 50 minutes to see off Gilles Muller. Many more matches like that and he'll be knackered by the time he faces Murray if they meet, as expected, in the fourth round.
And Watson has saved her match, winning the tenth game and taking the third set to 5-5.
Another British hope is hanging on, with Heather Watson having just saved two match points against Caroline Garcia in the third and final set.
Laura Robson's Wimbledon return is over - she has lost in straight sets to Evgeniya Rodina, but it was a spirited performance in front of a hopeful home crowd. She was saved temporarily by a questionable line-call on a Rodina match point but couldn't hold on for long. These guys back her all the way.
Here's the wonderful Roger Federer with a typically modest reaction to his victory
BREAKING Nadal has beaten Thomaz Bellucci in straight sets. In all a convincing performance.
Murray will be out on court soon - you can follow his match with Mikhail Kukushkin here
BREAKING Roger Federer has taken just 1 hour 7 minutes to wrap up his first round win. Poor Damir Dzumhur never really stood a chance. Murray's up next on Centre Court.
Nadal is closing in on victory - here's some audio of him winning the second set.
Nadal is now a break up over Bellucci and it sounded like someone in the crowd just shouted 'It's so easy! at the Spaniard' He's not wrong.
Meanwhile, Tsonga has gone to a fifth set against Muller. They're well into their fourth hour and will be tiring in this heat.
Celeb spot! Edith Bowman's at Wimbledon!
I spoke too soon. Nadal has broken straight back. Bellucci is growing increasingly frustrated.
Oh, and Federer is two sets up against Dzumhur. Here he is winning another point.
Belluci has broken Nadal in the third and we might just have a match on our hands here. If you want to follow that one in a bit more detail you can do so with Charlie Eccleshare here
Here's some audio of Federer winning that first set
Both Nadal and Rodina held serve and went on to win those sets.
Nadal won 80% of his first serve points in that set compared to Belucci's 54%. Says it all really.
Nadal isn't making as light work of his first round match as Fed, but he is 5-2 up in the second set and looking good.
Laura Robson, playing in her first slam in nearly 18 months, has just saved a set point against Evgeniya Rodina but remains a break down in the first.
I'd barely finished writing that and Federer had taken the first set. 18 minutes it took him.
And on that note, Federer is already two breaks up here. It's 5-1 to the Swiss.
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, meanwhile, is toiling against Gilles Muller. He has won the third set but has already been playing for 2 hours and 40 minutes in serious heat. Good news for Andy Murray, though, who could face Tsonga in the fourth round.
In case you needed reminding about just how legendary Roger Federer is, here's a lovely little career stats round-up
Over on centre court, meanwhile, Roger Federer is under way against Damir Dzumhur - you can follow that match here
The reigns have been passed over from the very capable hands of Giles Mole, to me, Alistair Tweedale, and I'll be taking you through the next couple of hours of Wimbledon action.
It's all go already - Nadal has already broken in the second set!
Nadal has taken the first set 6-4 against Bellucci.
I've been casting my eye around Wimbers for some celebs and here's who I've found so far...
Muller has levelled matters against Tsonga, it's one set all after another tie-break. And Kvitova has demolished Bertens 6-1, 6-0... in just 35 minutes.
Poor Beeb. The revamped Wimbledon highlights show has been subjected to stinging attacks from viewers after its first broadcast on Monday night.
The corporation has ditched its traditional format, which saw pundits discussing the day's play with presenter John Inverdale on one of the All England Club's outdoor terraces, for a daily highlights package called 'Wimbledon 2day'. Yes, that's right, '2Day'. Urrrggghhh!
This year, presenter Clare Balding discusses the action in front of a live audience of fans - some of whom came dressed in bright orange jackets - at The Gatsby Club, one of Wimbledon's hospitality suites.
However, the format does not appear to sit well with viewers, who criticised the BBC for 'dumbing down' its coverage and for not making best use of pundits John McEnroe and Lindsay Davenport, both former Wimbledon champions. (Read more here)
BBC FAIL Retweet if you think #Wimbledon2Day is dire pic.twitter.com/jnx2FNQUzM
Nice job, BBC! Why bother with tennis highlights when you can just have an hour of inane babbling instead? #wimbledon2day
BREAKING Great Britain's Kyle Edmund has lost 7-6 (7/4), 6-1, 6-2 to Ukrainian Alexandr Dolgopolov in the first round.
Kvitova has taken the first set against Bertens 6-1. The reigning champ is wasting no time here. Sdid not lose a point on serve all set.
Organisers will be pleased with their decision to install an additional six ice baths in the locker rooms this year. Normally used for post-exercise recovery, players are being advised to have a pre-match dip ahead their matches.
Dolgopolov breaks Edmund again and in a blink of an eye the Ukrainian leads by two sets to love. Can't see any way back for the Brit now.
Angelique Kerber has become the third player at Wimbledon this year to achieve the usually rare 'double bagel' as she beat fellow German Carina Witthoeft 6-0, 6-0.
Former semi-finalist Kerber is a solid grass-court performer and won the Aegon Classic title in Birmingham earlier this month.
Seeded 10th for Wimbledon, she followed Venus Williams and Andrea Petkovic, who both won without dropping a game on Monday, in making the most straightforward possible progress to the second round.
Before this tournament, there had not been a Wimbledon double bagel in the women's singles for six years.
The main courts are up and running, with defending women's champion Petra Kvitova taking her first service game against Kiki Bertens and Rafael Nadal about to start against Thomaz Bellucci on No1 Court. You can follow the latter right here ...
After losing the first set on a tie-break, Edmund is losing his way a little. He's 3-1 down in the second set to Dolgopolov. Meanwhile, Tsonga has gone 1-0 up in the first after (you guessed it) another tie-break 7-6 (10-8). Tie-breaks in this heat are not the best idea.
Remember that (made-up) competition we've been running for best hair at Wimbledon? Germany's Dustin Brown is definitely another contender...
Look who's watching the tennis today... make sure you splash on the Factor 50 Roy
Tsonga-Muller has also gone to a tie-break in the first.
If you won't listen to me, listen to Wimbledon:
It's a scorcher out there today, folks. Make sure you apply suncream liberally and drink plenty of fluids #Wimbledon pic.twitter.com/FApiKeq4VB
Dolgopolov has one the first set against Edmund 7-6 after a close-fought tie-break. Edmund was 4-2 up in the tie-break but he's gone on to lose 7-4.
Spectators watching Edmund - it's 4-4 in the first at the mo - are having to cover up to keep out the sun...
Dolgopolov, conquerer of Nadal at Queen's, is playing our very own Kyle Edmund. They've already traded breaks and it's 2-2 in the first.
Hands up who knows their Drakes from their Craig Davids? Yes? No?
Following his performance at Sunday's Wireless Festival, American rapper Drake decided to pop down to Wimbledon.
Sadly for the US star, it seems tennis fans aren't that clued up on their rap music.
. @DJSarahJane was not impressed me mixing up Craig David & Drake yesterday pic.twitter.com/KsAQrCjOgm
In case you are oblivious to who either are, here you go:
Drake (left), Craig David (right)
Britain's very own golden girl, Laura Robson, is second on Court Three today against Russia's Evgeniya Rodina. The Press Association have done this snazzy little graphic...
... I'm guessing the thunderstorm means she's got no chance!
Sound advice from Kelly Sotherton... everyone going to Wimbledon take note:
Heading to @Wimbledon tomorrow to sit and watch from the comfort of the Royal Box. Big dilemma... OUTFIT!
I must add the dress code is a suit and tie or blazer and tie.. I have a feeling I could be slightly warm tomorrow. #royalbox #Wimbledon2015
@GregJRutherford @Wimbledon nothing tight Greg. You'll get the sweats!
We're running a (made up) competition for the best hairstyle at Wimbledon - I nominate this man...
Girl power! Andy Murray has credited his excellent form to a new team in which women play a central role. (Read the full story here)
When Mauresmo was hired by Murray last June, replacing Ivan Lendl, there were raised eyebrows in some quarters. Murray's bad form last year did nothing to quieten the sceptics who questioned the wisdom of hiring a woman.
But, having recovered from back surgery, this season he has made a remarkable resurgence as Mauresmo, a former world No 1, brought his game back into focus.
"They say I was plucky choosing Amélie but, truth be told, if anyone was plucky it was Amélie – she's the one who has taken the heat," he said in May. "Her competence was always under fire. I felt embarrassed."
A year after being hailed as the next big thing in women's tennis, Eugenie Bouchard (Laura Robson's BFF until they fell out) has come back down to earth... with a bump.
After reaching the 2014 Wimbledon final and semi-finals at the Australian and French Open, Bouchard had a top-five world ranking and made changes including a new management contract and a coaching switch. owever, although the 21-year-old Canadian reached the quarter-finals of Melbourne in January, she's since racked up seven first-round losses.
(Queue unapologetic use of Bouchard pictures...)
"It's classic what we're seeing happening to her. We've seen it many times, a player bursting onto the scene, kind of their honeymoon period when they are just on the rise. And it's a whole different ball game when suddenly, they become the hunted, not the hunter," said Annabel Croft, a former British No 1 who was subject to hype in the British press after she won the junior Wimbledon title in 1984.
Bouchard faces Chinese qualifier Ying-Ying Duan in the first round today.
Ok, this will be the last time I mention the weather, unless someone faints.
Wimbledon organisers say a heat rule, which allows for a 10-minute break between the second and third sets of women's matches, can be called for when temperatures rise above 30.1 degrees.
However, the rule which has been adopted by Wimbledon after lobbying from the WTA, does not apply to men even though they have to slug it out over the best of five sets!!
As I said earlier, today's heat is expected to hover around the 30C mark, but is expected to boil to around 35C on Wednesday. The highest ever temperature at Wimbledon was recorded at 34 degrees in 1976.
Maria Sharapova is not worried about the heat
Maria Sharapova, the highest earner in women's sport and the 2004 champion at Wimbledon, has said it is wrong to describe the heat index rule being invoked only for women as sexist, but admits the men too should be allowed the same courtesy.
"I think if it's something that they're concerned about it, they can reevaluate," said the Russian. "If it does get quite hot for us, we're able to use it, then why not?"
Women's world No 1 Serena Williams, who like Sharapova is scheduled to play the second round on Wednesday, said the heat would not concern her as she regularly trains in temperatures of over 40 degrees at her Florida home.
"I don't think I've ever played in 34, 35 degrees here, but I do in other countries. I just was training in Florida - it was like 42 degrees. This will be okay," said the American.
We have a further update on the scorching weather. It looks like us poor Brits will roast in a two-week Wimbledon heatwave of around 30C or higher through the weekend - and next week - thanks to further bursts of scorching air from Spain.
London will remain a furnace while the North and West is set to stay warm until Tuesday, then see conditions ease.
Met Office forecaster Daniel Panton-King said: "Temperatures have the potential to build again on Friday, with 30C possible, and similar on Saturday and Sunday.
"Monday and Tuesday look like the high 20s, with the hint for heat hanging on to the following weekend in the South, with the high 20s possible.
"Warm conditions may break down early next week in the North and West."
Right, to the nitty gritty, the order of play on the main showcourts today:
Centre Court (1300 BST start)
Kiki Bertens (Netherlands) v Petra Kvitova (Czech Republic)  Damir Dzumhur (Bosnia) v Roger Federer (Switzerland)  Mikhail Kukushkin (Kazakhstan) v Andy Murray (Britain)
Court One (1300 BST start)
Thomaz Bellucci (Brazil) v Rafael Nadal (Spain)  Jana Cepelova (Slovakia) v Simona Halep (Romania)  Tomas Berdych (Czech Republic) v Jeremy Chardy (France)
Court Two (1130 BST start)
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga (France) v Gilles Muller (Luxembourg)  Nicolas Almagro (Spain) v Gilles Simon (France)  Ekaterina Makarova (Russia) v Sachia Vickery (US)  Caroline Wozniacki (Denmark) v Saisai Zheng (China)
Court Three (1130 BST start)
Alexandr Dolgopolov (Ukraine) v Kyle Edmund (Britain)  Evgeniya Rodina (Russia) v Laura Robson (Britain)  Ying-Ying Duan (China) v Eugenie Bouchard (Canada)  Gael Monfils (France) v Pablo Carreno Busta (Spain)
Good morning everybody... and what a morning! It's a belter out there, sunny and warm so here's to an uninterrupted day's play... clink!
Unless of course it gets so unbearably hot that they actually have to suspend play for a bit which, depending what you read, might actually be a possibility, especially tomorrow.
Today the mercury level is expected to peak around 30 degrees, so about 35C on court. Wednesday you can add another five degrees on top of that!!
Anyway, here's today's forecast courtsey of our friends at the Beeb. If you're heading down to SW19, bring a hat and lots of water.
Extreme heat was a feature of last year's Australian Open in Melbourne, as temperatures soared above 100F (37.7C)
The roasting on-court temperatures saw a raft of player meltdowns, with Frank Dancevic, Shaui Peng, Ivan Dodig, Varvara Lepchenko, Galina Voskoboeva and Jamie Murray suffering the most severe reactions.
Canadian Dancevic was treated by the side of the court after he collapsed during his first-round defeat at the hands of Benoit Paire, from France.
But while the Women's Tennis Association (WTA) has strict guidelines for dealing with extreme heat, the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP), which governs the men's game, still has none.
Play gets under way at 11.30am on the show courts, while the action will start on Centre Court and Court One at 1pm; (x denotes seeding).
Centre Court (1pm) Kiki Bertens (Holl) v Petra Kvitova (Cz Rep x2)  Damir Dzumhur (Bih) v Roger Federer (Swit, x2) Mikhail Kukushkin (Kaz) v Andy Murray (GB, x3)
Court One (1pm) Thomaz Bellucci (Bra) v Rafael Nadal (Spa, x10) Jana Cepelova (Svk) v Simona Halep (Rom, x3) Tomas Berdych (Cz Rep, x6) v Jeremy Chardy (Fr)
Court Two (11.30am) Jo-Wilfried Tsonga (Fr, x13) v Gilles Muller (Lux) Nicolas Almagro (Sp) v Gilles Simon (Fra, x12)  Ekaterina Makarova (Rus, x8) v Sachia Vickery (US) Caroline Wozniacki (Den, x5) v Saisai Zheng (China)
Court Three (11:30am) Alexandr Dolgopolov (Ukr) v Kyle Edmund (GB) Evgeniya Rodina (Rus) v Laura Robson (GB) Ying-ying Duan (China) v Eugenie Bouchard (Can, x12) Gael Monfils (Fr, x18) v Pablo Carreno Busta (Sp)
Court 12 (11:30am) Elias Ymer (Swe) v Ivo Karlovic (Cro, x23) Heather Watson (GB) v Caroline Garcia (Fra, x32) - resuming from Monday Agnieszka Radwanska (Pol, x 13) v Lucie Hradecka (Cz Rep) Luca Vanni (It) v James Ward (GB) Jarmila Gajdosova (Aus) v Sabine Lisicki (Ger, 18)
. @DJSarahJane was not impressed me mixing up Craig David & Drake yesterday pic.twitter.com/KsAQrCjOgm
Court 18 (11:30am)  Carina Witthoeft (Ger) v Angelique Kerber (Ger, 10) Andreas Seppi (It, x25) v Brydan Klein (GB) Feliciano Lopez (Sp, x15) v Steve Darcis (Bel) Svetlana Kuznetsova (Rus, x26) v Laura Siegemund (Ger)
Court 4 (11:30am)  Mateusz Kowalczyk (Pol) / Igor Zelenay (Svk) v Marcel Granollers (Sp) / Marc Lopez (Sp) x6 Victor Estrella Burgos (Dom) / Joao Souza (Br) v Andre Begemann (Ger) / Julian Knowle (Aut) Lara Arruabarrena (Sp) v Pauline Parmentier (Fr), Andreea Mitu (Rom) v Olga Govortsova (Blr)
Court 5 (11.30am) Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova (Rus) v Mona Barthel (Ger) Sam Querrey (US) v Igor Sijsling (Holl) Pablo Andujar (Sp) v Guillermo Garcia-Lopez (Sp, x29) Karin Knapp (It) v Magdalena Rybarikova (Svk)
Court 6 (11:30am)  Ruben Bemelmans (Bel) v Roberto Bautista Agut (Sp, x20) Viktor Troicki (Srb, x22) v Aleksandr Nedovyesov (Kaz) Kristyna Pliskova (Cz Rep) v Tereza Smitkova (Cz Rep) Katerina Siniakova (Cz Rep) v Denisa Allertova (Cz Rep)
Court 7 (11:30am)  Misaki Doi (Jpn) v Elina Svitolina (Ukr, x17) Denis Istomin (Uzb) v Albert Ramos-Vinolas (Sp) Robin Haase (Holl) v Alejandro Falla (Col) Johanna Larsson (Swe) v Christina McHale (US)
Newly naturalised Briton Aljaz Bedene is last on Court 8
Court 8 (11:30am)  Magda Linette (Pol) v Kurumi Nara (Jpn) Yuichi Sugita (Jpn) v Blaz Kavcic (Slo) Radek Stepanek (Cz Rep) v Aljaz Bedene (GB)
Court 9 (11:30am)  Dustin Brown (Ger) v Yen-Hsun Lu (Tpe) Daniela Hantuchova (Svk) / Samantha Stosur (Aus) v Janette Husarova (Svk) / Paula Kania (Pol) Monica Puig (Pur) v Monica Niculescu (Rom) Adrian Mannarino (Fr) v Michael Berrer (Ger)
Court 10 (11:30am)  Mirjana Lucic-Baroni (Cro) v Yaroslava Shvedova (Kaz) Sergiy Stakhovsky (Ukr) v Borna Coric (Cro) Jiri Vesely (Cz Rep) v Paolo Lorenzi (It) Sesil Karatantcheva (Bul) v Silvia Soler-Espinosa (Sp)
Court 11 (11:30am)  Benoit Paire (Fr) v Mikhail Youzhny (Rus) Vasek Pospisil (Can) v Vincent Millot (Fr) Tatjana Maria (Ger) v Bojana Jovanovki (Srb) Yanina Wickmayer (Bel) v Elizaveta Kulichkova (Rus)
Court 15 (11:30am)  Garbine Muguruza (Sp, 20) v Varvara Lepchenko (US) Nikoloz Basilashvili (Geo) v Facundo Bagnis (Arg) Bethanie Mattek-Sands (US) / Lucie Safarova (Cz Rep) x3 v Naomi Broady (GB) / Emily Webley-Smith (GB) Teliana Pereira (Bra) v Camila Giorgi (It, x31)
Court 16 (11:30am)  Tamira Paszek (Aut) v Casey Dellacqua (Aus) Jack Sock (US, x31) v Sam Groth (Aus) Jelena Jankovic (Srb, x28) v Elena Vesnina (Rus)
Court 17 (11:30am)  Malek Jaziri (Tun) v James Duckworth (Aus) Ajla Tomljanovic (Aus) v Klara Koukalova (Cz Rep) Filip Krajinovic (Srb) v Nicolas Mahut (Fr) Madison Keys (US, x21) v Stefanie Voegele (Swit)
Court 19 (11:30am)  Margarita Gasparyan (Rus) / Alexandra Panova (Rus) v Ysaline Bonaventure (Bel) / Katalin Marosi (Hun) Tim Smyczek (US) v Fabio Fognini (It, x30) Ernests Gulbis (Lat) v Lukas Rosol (Cz Rep)
TBC not before 5:30pm:  (15) Timea Bacsinszky (Swit, x15) v Julia Goerges (Ger) Ana Konjuh (Cro) v Alize Cornet (Fr, x25)