Here's the match report from W14, as Andy Murray gave himself the best possible workout before the Wimbledon fortnight:
Andy Murray became a record-equalling four-time winner at Queen's after outclassing Kevin Anderson in the final of the Aegon Championships.
Murray, who was pulling double duty after seeing off Viktor Troicki in a delayed semi-final earlier in the day, won 6-3, 6-4 in just one hour and four minutes.
The crowd were getting their money's worth from Murray, who was not allowing Anderson a look in.
At one stage Anderson had the upper hand for the duration of an entertaining rally only for the latter to land a desperate lob on the base line then produce a magnificent winner on the run.
The score moved to 5-4, allowing Murray to serve for the game.
The Briton mustered a big serve to seal the match, Anderson just managing to make contact but unable to make Murray play again.
Confirmation of just how big the Queen's Cup is - big Kevin Anderson might have suited this better, but it's all Murray's:
Here's four-time champion Murray, fresh from his double-header today:
Both matches today were good performances...it's been a great week for me. Kevin's playing great tennis - I had to play that way if I wanted to win today.
I'm playing better than [2013] I feel...everyone's improving all the time. I still think there are things I can learn and improve on.
The vanquished Kevin Anderson gets a warm reception from the crowd as he accepts his runner-up champagne, trophy and six-figure check.
It's been terrific, I thought I played some really good tennis throughout the week - I'm going to take some positives from this
Confirmation of Murray's illustrious company in the Queen's Club history books:
Anderson, at 0-15, has a great chance to make this interesting, but he plants a winnable backhand into the net. Murray punishes that with a perfect one-two off his next serve, and follows that with a solid serve for two Championship points. He only needs one of them - and that's his fourth title at Queen's Club!
Anderson's serves holds up well, despite Murray's characteristic efforts. Murray to serve for the match now...
In the late afternoon breeze, Murray takes a step closer to Queen's Club title no.4 - Anderson's pulled all over the court before being lobbed with crowd-pleasing aplomb. Excellent stuff.
Brutal stuff from Anderson, who hammers down a couple more aces to keep Murray honest and stops another attempted lob.
After the gymnastics of that last game, Murray looks set for a routine hold, but carelessness lets Anderson back in at 40-30. Just as the South African seemed to be getting the upper hand of a lengthy rally, Murray whips a wonderful forehand across court to hold serve.
The best rally of the match so far ends with Murray spooning a volley back from whence Anderson came. Anderson responds with an ace and then another thunderous first serve, but Murray instinctively clips a forehand return down the line to thrill the crowd - what a shot.
Murray is relishing this specific challenge - as he said he would - and he completes another break of serve by leading Anderson a merry full-court dance. A lob is followed by the most perfectly disguised dropper, and the 6ft 8in frame can't quite respond.
Anderson gets to the relative basecamp of 0-15, but Murray responds by swinging an ace down the middle, which gently arcs away from his opponent's desperate lunge. Murray's first serve - if not quite his second - has been very solid so far. Murray secures the hold after a brief exchange of backhands.
"Get down!" orders Murray to himself, conjuring up all sorts of images, while Anderson continues to rain down the aces and slams - the latest a vicious backhand swat at the net that narrowly misses the umpires chair on its way through.
Murray has Anderson loping left, right and left again, which means only one thing: 40-0. Another forehand twists the South African's blood again, and it's an easy hold.
Anderson, both guns blazing, is 30-0 up before I even realised the second set was under way. Murray responds by taking a backhand nice and early down the line, but Anderson's not in the mood for a rally - down goes another ace to seal the hold.
Murray takes a shade under half an hour to take the first set, although Anderson eventually makes him work for it at 40-0, plucking a lob out of the sky. Efficient stuff from Murray, that.
Strong set from @andy_murray as he takes it 6-3 and is a set away from his fourth #AegonChampionships title! pic.twitter.com/WxwbV3nRAw
Much more to Anderson's liking, as he holds to love - finishing with a slammed overhead that ends up...somewhere in Shepherd's Bush, I think.
The first rally is a stretched affair, which suits Murray the better and Anderson hammers a forehand into the net. The next exchange is again a lengthy one, which ends with another wayward shot from Anderson. Murray steers a forehand into the corner, with his opponent stranded, to wrap up a very tidy service game. Murray not being pushed anywhere near his limit just yet.
Anderson's latest service game is a more decisive affair, as he comes to the net behind that huge serve. An ace takes it to 40-0, and he brings up a century of unreturnables at Queen's this year to put the game to bed.
Some fine Murray serving pins Anderson back now, but the South African pounces on a second serve to get a foothold. The first impudent Murray dropshot nestles perfectly beyond the net and he secures an important hold of serve by steering a forehand across court and out of Anderson's considerable reach. In football parlance there, he did Anderson with his eyes.
A solid Anderson double-hander down the line gets the better of Murray, who gave the return of serve everything he had, but Murray gets to the next missile. Now it's Murray's chance to take control, punching a backhand across court for 15-40, and Anderson nets a volley to lose his serve for only the second time in the tournament. Murray breaks!
Anderson looks even more gigantic in the foreground, and he wins another brief battle at the net - Murray has a little slip, raising a few pulse-rates, but muddles his way to a hold of serve.
Anderson's straight in at the net to wrongfoot Murray with a tidy volley and, although his formidable serve's coming straight back, he wins another exchange at the net. A 97th ace of the tournament follows, as does the 98th. Game Anderson.
Murray's comfortable hold of serve is interrupted briefly by a friendly bee.
Here we go, then - top seed Andy Murray to serve...
Murray will serve first and, discussing the giant Anderson, the BBC pundit John Lloyd indulges us with the first "good movement for a big man".
The players are out - Centre Court is now full to capacity - and we're moments away from what should be an intriguing match-up. Murray won here in 2009, 2011 and 2013, so can he extend the pattern?
One from the archives: an 18-year-old Andy Murray grabs the attention at Queen's in 2005, before succumbing to cramp against Thomas Johansson:
AN OMEN. A complicated one, too.
It's 14 years since someone not called Andy has won #AegonChampionships in an odd year! Can Kevin break the spell? pic.twitter.com/Diw18Un3pt
Wimbledon warm-up news from elsewhere: Roger Federer has secured his eighth title at Halle, with a 7-6 6-4 victory over Andreas Seppi, the 86th world tour title of his career. He'll still be there or thereabouts at SW19, even if Novak Djokovic will go into the tournament as the favourite.
Final preparations in W14:
Fresh 7mm mow before the final #AegonChampionships pic.twitter.com/7ASyugqXIr
Stat of the Day:
Andy Murray up to 4481 career aces, only 1 ace behind Tsonga who is 25th in the all time list. Looks like Andy will overtake today @tennis
Who's number one, you ask? Everyone's favourite big-serving Croatian (unless your name is Ivo Karlovic) Goran Ivanisevic, with 10,183 aces.
I've Googled unearthed footage of Anderson's one and only win over Murray, at the 2011 Rogers Cup in Montreal:
It's not all about the big serve - as he also showed against Gilles Simon yesterday - but it's a certifiable weapon, no doubt about it. Murray relishes this sort of challenge, though - he's arguably the best returner in the game and he'll be trying to get Anderson's 6ft 8in frame moving around the court as often as possible.
Courtesy of the ATP's slick website, here's the tale of the tape between Andy Murray and Kevin Anderson:
Enjoying the action in W14 this weekend has been Jose Mourinho, who joined Tennis Podcast presenter David Law for a chat after the rainclouds gathered last night.
He explained why he likes tennis so much, how he would like to spend time with Murray to compare notes on their respective sports, and how he could never cope with being a tennis coach, unable to give team-talks during a match.
“In tennis they take penalty shoot-outs all day,” said Mourinho. "Every point is a tough decision so they have to be really strong. I always say that in my sport sometimes we hide behind each other, we can always find excuses in success and in failure and in this way tennis is phenomenal because you have to be really strong."
Subscribe on iTunes - https://goo.gl/9qdZq6
Subscribe on Android - https://goo.gl/FHXN7q
It's not just a double shift for Andy Murray today - our man Simon Briggs has filed his match report from Murray's semi-final win:
Andy Murray despatched Viktor Troicki in a superb display of shotmaking this morning. After reeling off the first four games to set up a 6-3, 1-0 lead, he had to fight back from a break down in the second set, but finally sealed the match on a memorable rally full of drop shots and lobs.
“I’ve never seen Murray look so good,” said the BBC commentator Andrew Castle. “It’s very exciting.”
Murray finally completed the job in the second-set tie-break. He thus maintained his 100 per cent record over Troicki and proceeded to the final against Kevin Anderson, which was scheduled for a 2.25pm start, by a 6-3, 7-6 margin.
"I’ll go and see my physio, get stretched out, get some food down me, shower and just get myself ready for the final now,” Murray told the BBC after spending just over an hour on the court.
"I enjoy playing big servers, it's obviously a challenge but the returns have always been the strongest part of my game. I will need to return well later if I want to have a chance of winning. I look forward to it."
Good afternoon. Andy Murray has time for "some food and a shower" after putting Viktor Troicki away in his semi-final, before taking on the big-serving 6ft 8in South African Kevin Anderson (that's his full name, by the way) in the final.
Anderson, nicely rested, lies in wait at 2.25pm. What's his story? Our tennis correspondent Simon Briggs obliges:
Kevin Anderson, the 6ft 8in South African, who has sent down 96 aces in the past week. It seems fitting that Anderson should have been the first man to go through to the trophy decider, considering that the tournament has been dominated by big servers from the off.
Anderson overcame Gilles Simon on Saturday in a close-run contest, which he eventually snatched by a 6-3, 6-7, 6-3 margin. He had a match point to win it in straight sets but Simon is a dogged character and he got as close as anyone has this week to handling Anderson’s ferocious delivery.
“He’s a great returner,” Anderson said afterwards. “Sort of joking aside, he calls himself the return genius. He knows his way around the return courts. So I think I can take a little bit of extra confidence in the way I was able to take care of my serve games today.”
Anderson hails from South Africa, where he grew up idolising Wayne Ferreira, but now lives in Florida like so many of the world’s leading tennis players and golfers.