REDMOND, Wash. — May 31, 2016 — Microsoft Corp. on Tuesday announced the winners and finalists of the Microsoft 2016 Partner of the Year Awards. The annual awards recognize top Microsoft partners demonstrating excellence in innovation and implementation of customer solutions based on Microsoft technology. Award winners and finalists from around the world will be recognized at the 2016 Microsoft Worldwide Partner Conference taking place July 10–14, 2016, in Toronto, Canada.
This year, Microsoft acknowledged partners in 37 categories celebrating each of the core partner competencies, including cloud technology, public sector, citizenship and many more. The award finalists and winners were selected from more than 2,500 nominations collected from 119 different countries worldwide based on their commitment to customers, their solution’s impact on the market and exemplary use of Microsoft technologies.
“The 2016 Partner of the Year Award winners and finalists represent the most innovative and transformative work being done across our partner community,” said Gavriella Schuster, general manager, Worldwide Partner Group, Microsoft. “It is important to recognize and celebrate the value and opportunity these solutions create for our mutual customers. Congratulations to all of this year’s winners and finalists on this tremendous achievement.”
Categories, winners and finalists appear below. A complete list, including the Microsoft Country Partner of the Year Award winners for 2016, is available at https://partner.microsoft.com/en-us/wpc/awards.
Global Commercial ISV Alliance Partner of the Year
Application Development Partner of the Year
Cloud Customer Relationship Management (CRM) Partner of the Year
Cloud Packaged Solutions Partner of the Year
Cloud Productivity Partner of the Year
Collaboration and Content Partner of the Year
Data Analytics Partner of the Year
Data Platform Partner of the Year
Developer Platform Partner of the Year
Enterprise Mobility Partner of the Year
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) Partner of the Year
Hosting Partner of the Year
Hybrid Cloud and Infrastructure Platform Partner of the Year
Internet of Things (IoT) Partner of the Year
Microsoft Azure Certified ISV Solution Partner of the Year
Microsoft Dynamics Industry Partner of the Year
Modern Marketing Partner of the Year
Open Source on Azure Partner of the Year
Partner Seller Partner of the Year
Project and Portfolio Management Partner of the Year
Public Sector: Education Partner of the Year
Public Sector: Government Partner of the Year
Public Sector: Health Partner of the Year
Public Sector: Microsoft CityNext Partner of the Year
Public Sector: Public Safety & National Security Partner of the Year
Small and Midmarket Cloud Solutions Partner of the Year
Software Asset Management (SAM) Partner of the Year
Technology for Good Partner of the Year
Volume Licensing Partner of the Year
Windows and Devices Deployment Partner of the Year
Microsoft’s Worldwide Partner Conference provides Microsoft’s partner community with access to key marketing and business strategies, leadership, and information regarding specific customer solutions designed to help partners succeed in the marketplace. Along with informative learning opportunities covering sales, marketing, services and technology, the Worldwide Partner Conference is an ideal setting for partners to garner valuable knowledge from their peers and from Microsoft. More information can be found at https://partner.microsoft.com/en-us/wpc.
Microsoft (Nasdaq “MSFT” @microsoft) is the leading platform and productivity company for the mobile-first, cloud-first world, and its mission is to empower every person and every organization on the planet to achieve more.
Note to editors: For more information, news and perspectives from Microsoft, please visit the Microsoft News Center at http://www.microsoft.com/news. Web links, telephone numbers and titles were correct at time of publication, but may have changed. For additional assistance, journalists and analysts may contact Microsoft’s Rapid Response Team or other appropriate contacts listed at http://www.microsoft.com/news/contactpr.mspx.