The Olympic Stadium is a sports stadium in Berlin. This Olympic Stadium is surrounded by the massive Olympischer Platz and was originally built for the 1936 Summer Olympics.
C. FIRST NATIONAL BANK STADIUM IN SOUTH AFRICA
First National Bank Stadium was built in 1987 and is located in Johannesburg, South Africa. It is the central venue for the South African Football Association (SAFA). A football-specific stadium, the FNB Stadium seats 78,000 people in plastic bucket seats. A two-metre wide "moat" runs around the entire field to protect players from over eager spectators. The most of the largest football events in South Africa are played at the FNB.
D. BORG EI ARAB STADIUM IN ALEXANDRIA
Borg EI Arab Stadium is a brand new stadium commissioned in 2006 in the Mediterranean Sea resort of Borg el Arab; 50 KM west of Alexandria, Egypt. It is the largest stadium in Egypt with a capacity of 80,000 and is an all-seater. It is located on the Cairo-Alexandria desert highway 10km from Borg El Arab Airport and 15km from the city centre. A running track runs around the pitch, and the ground has four large floodlights. Only one stand is covered by a roof.
E. NATIONAL SPORT STADIUM IN HARARE
National Sports Stadium is a multi-use Stadium and is located in Harare, Zimbabwe. It is currently used mostly for football matches. The stadium holds 60,000.
F. ROYAL BAFOKENG STADIUM IN RUSTENBURG
Royal Mafokeng stadium is located in Rustenburg, in the North West Province; the Royal Bafokeng Stadium was opened in 1999 and completely funded by the Royal Bafokeng community, an administrative entity presiding over the world's richest platinum mines. Access is simple as it is built on open land and so has extensive parking facilities. It is a 90 minute drive from Johannesburg to the stadium. The stadium is currently a multi-purpose venue which includes an athletics track. It is already very well-equipped and it will require only minor renovations to bring it up to FIFA standards. The capacity of the stadium will be increased to 40,000 with the construction of two additional rows of seating on the second level.
G. STADE MOHAMED V IN MOROCO
Stade Mohammed V (Arabic) is located in Casablanca, Morocco. It is a national stadium. It has a capacity of 55,000. It was built in 1955, and most recently renovated in 1999. It is an all-seater, and has a running track.
Botswana National Stadium is a multi-use stadium in Gaborone, Botswana. It is currently used mostly for football matches. The stadium holds 22,500.The stadium is made up of a total of ten stands, three of which are covered. Three large stands on each end of the stadium make up the north and south ends. The west side of the stadium is made up of three covered stands, while the east end is made up of one giant uncoved stand.
I. BEIJING WORKERS STADIUM IN CHINA
The Workers Stadium is a multi-purpose stadium and is located in Beijing, China. It is currently used mostly for football matches. The stadium was built in 1959. It was last renovated in 2004 and now holds 66,161. It was the main venue for the 1990 Asian Games, where the opening and closing ceremonies were held. Some high attendance matches of Beijing Hyundai Football club are also held at the stadium.
Luzhniki stadium is the Grand Sports Arena of the Luzhniki Olympic Complex in Moscow, or briefly Luzhniki Stadium is the biggest sports stadium in Russia. Its total seating capacity is 84,745 seats, all covered. The stadium is a part of the Luzhniki Olympic Complex, previously called the Central Lenin Stadium.
Tianhe Stadium is a multi-use stadium and is located in Guangzhou, China. It is currently used mostly for football matches. The stadium holds 60,000. It was built in 1987, and hosted the final of the inaugural FIFA Women's World Cup in 1991.