Elvis Stojko of Canada had landed a quadruple-toe, triple-toe combination jump and eight triple jumps in the most technically difficult program ever performed at the world figure skating championships. The Italian judge had given him a perfect mark of 6 for his extraordinary leaping ability. Still, the door was left open tonight for Todd Eldredge of Chatham, Mass., to defend his men's title.
As it turned out, Eldredge, 25, did not need a quadruple -- or four-revolution -- jump to win. Not with his advantage in artistry, flow, speed and spinning. And not with the withdrawal of the injured defending Olympic champion, Aleksei Urmanov of Russia. But Eldredge did need a second triple axel, which eluded the tiring skater twice in the last minute of his free program.
So Eldredge improvised valiantly in the final 18 seconds of his four-and-a-half-minute routine, but fell to the ice and tumbled out of what likely would have been first place had he landed another triple axel.
With the dramatic turn of events, Stojko vaulted from fourth place after Wednesday's short program to first place in tonight's long program, which counted for two-thirds of the scoring.
The third world championship in four years for Stojko came on an otherwise somber day that saw Urmanov's unexpected withdrawal and the death of prominent American coach, Carlo Fassi, from a heart attack. Stojko, the 1994 Olympic silver medalist, redeemed himself assertively after a fall in the short program had cost him a chance at the title last year before a home crowd in Edmonton, Alberta.
''To be able to come back after last year, and push away everything and still believe in myself, that's what makes it special,'' said Stojko, who finished fourth in 1996.
Stojko, who holds a black belt in karate and also competes in all-black costumes, deserved to win; eight of the nine judges voted him first. Only the American judge favored Eldredge.
But Stojko's presentation was lacking in energy, expressiveness and intricate choreography, and he appeared to have confused slowness with artistry. So the judges left room for Eldredge, who followed Stojko on the ice, to prevail with a clean program and more alluring presentation. In the long program, the artistic mark, not the technical mark, serves as a tie breaker. The title was there for the taking, but Eldredge could not hold on.
''I can't argue with it,'' Eldredge said. ''One mistake made the difference.''
Once again, Elvis is King. Not a bad present for his 25th birthday, to come on Saturday.
''You get it from all angles,'' said Stojko, who was given his first name because his Slovenian father and Hungarian mother liked Elvis Presley's name as well as his music. ''I hear I'm not confident, my program's not up to par, I'm not as artistic as the next guy. But I put it all aside and focused on how I felt.''
Urmanov led after Wednesday's short program, but, because of a groin injury, he could not challenge Stojko with a quadruple jump of his own tonight.
After taking three pain-killing injections and struggling through the warm-up, Urmanov withdrew.
''I just can't jump,'' said Urmanov, who suffered the groin injury after landing a triple axel in Wednesday's short program.
Aleksei Yagudin of Russia won the bronze medal, but Urmanov's withdrawal was costly both for himself and Russian figure skating. Under new rules, only two Russian men instead of three qualified for the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan. The Americans have also qualified only two skaters, which could dilute the competition at the Winter Games.
Urmanov's coach, Aleksei Mishin, said that he did not want to risk further injury by sending Urmanov on the ice to skate a simple routine and hope for a third Olympic qualifying spot.
''We are former Soviet coaches, but liberty brought us part of liberty,'' Mishin said. ''Before we went firing into the machine guns for the Motherland. Now we think of the health of the athletes.''
Early tonight, Guo Zhengxin of China became the first person to land two quads in one routine. But his skating is unpolished, and he could finish no higher than 15th place. It was left to Stojko to display the full possibility of jumping on frozen water. He said he was not aware that Urmanov had withdrawn, and that it would not have caused him to play it safe, anyway.
''A runner doesn't go to the line and say, 'I can hold back,' because someone else dropped out,'' Stojko said.
Skating to music from the movie ''Dragon Heart,'' Stojko remained perfectly still for 20 seconds and had little choreography to connect his jumps. After Sunday's qualifying round, Joe Inman, an American judge not working here, said Stojko's routine had ''a lot of blank areas.'' The American coach Evy Scotvold said, ''It's slow; all he does is stand around.''
Mishin, Urmanov's coach, defended Stojko's attacking style tonight.
''It's possible not to like his skating,'' Mishin said. ''But he's an outstanding athlete. At least I feel he has nerve, tension. I think this is one of the ways to develop the art of skating.''
For his technical skills, Stojko received eight 5.9's and one perfect 6. But the Italian judge also gave him a 5.6 for presentation. So did the American judge.
There was room for Eldredge, who started strongly with a triple-axel, triple-toe combination, and five other triples. A second triple axel would give him eight triples overall and, likely, victory.
Having fallen on the second triple axel in Sunday's qualifying round, Eldredge used too much power tonight, lost his rhythm and did only a single axel.
Eldredge tried again 4 minutes 12 seconds into his routine, but he took off awkwardly, tried to pull out of the jump, and fell.
''It was dumb,'' Eldredge said of the initial miss on the triple axel. ''The triple axel is one of my better jumps. To miss that one, I'm upset with myself.
''If I had done that one, I would have made it much more difficult for the judges.''