The articles in this Schools selection have been arranged by curriculum topic thanks to SOS Children volunteers. Do you want to know about sponsoring? See www.sponsorachild.org.uk
The United States Open Championship, commonly known as the U.S. Open, is the annual  open golf tournament of the United States. It is the second of the four  major championships in golf, and is on the official schedule of both the  PGA Tour and the  European Tour. It is staged by the  United States Golf Association (USGA) in mid-June, scheduled so that, if there are no weather delays, the final round is played on the third Sunday, which is  Father's Day.
The U.S. Open is staged at a variety of courses, set up in such a way that scoring is very difficult with a premium placed on accurate driving. U.S. Open play is characterized by tight scoring at or around par by the leaders, with the winner usually emerging at around even par. A U.S. Open course is seldom beaten severely, and there have been many over-par wins (in part because par is usually set at 70 except for the very longest courses). Normally, an Open course is quite long and will have a high cut of primary rough (termed "Open rough" by the American press and fans), undulating greens (such as at  Pinehurst No. 2 in 2005, which was described by  Johnny Miller of  NBC as "like trying to hit a ball on top of a  VW Beetle"), and pinched fairways (especially on what are expected to be less difficult holes). Some courses that are attempting to get into the rotation for the U.S. Open will undergo renovations to develop these features.  Rees Jones is the most notable of the "Open Doctors" who take on these projects; his father  Robert Trent Jones had filled that role earlier. As with any professional golf tournament, the available space surrounding the course (for spectators, among other considerations) and local infrastructure also factor into deciding which courses will host the event.
The U.S. Open is the only one of the four major championships which does not go immediately to a playoff if two or more players are tied at the end of the four rounds. Instead, the players play a fifth 18-hole round the following day (Monday), but if a tie still exists after that round, then a sudden-death playoff is held. Only three times has the U.S. Open gone to sudden-death after the playoff round, most recently in 2008 when Tiger Woods defeated  Rocco Mediate on the first additional playoff hole.
Coverage of The U.S. Open is broadcast on television by  NBC and  ESPN, with additional online coverage of a marquee group provided by ESPN via the U.S. Open's official website. Of golf's broadcast television partners in the U.S., NBC is the only network to provide four days of major tournament coverage ( CBS, which airs the Masters and the PGA Championship, only provides weekend coverage of its tournaments; since 2010, the Open Championship has not been aired live on an over-the-air network, with all four rounds airing on ESPN and only edited highlights screened by  ABC).
The first U.S. Open was played on October 4, 1895, on a nine-hole course at the  Newport Country Club in  Newport, Rhode Island. It was a 36-hole competition and was played in a single day. Ten professionals and one amateur entered. The winner was a 21-year-old Englishman named  Horace Rawlins, who had arrived in the U.S. in January that year to take up a position at the host club. He received $150 cash out of a prize fund of $335, plus a $50 gold medal; his club received the Open Championship Cup trophy, which was presented by the USGA.
In the beginning, the tournament was dominated by experienced British players until 1911, when  John J. McDermott became the first native-born American winner. American golfers soon began to win regularly and the tournament evolved to become one of the four  majors.
Since 1911, the title has been won almost exclusively by players from the United States. Since 1950, players from only six countries other than the United States have won the championship, most notably South Africa, which has won five times since 1965. A streak of four consecutive non-American winners occurred from 2004 to 2007 for the first time since 1910. These four players, South African  Retief Goosen (2004), New Zealander  Michael Campbell (2005), Australian  Geoff Ogilvy (2006) and Argentine  Ángel Cabrera (2007), are all from countries in the  Southern Hemisphere. Northern Ireland's  Graeme McDowell (2010) became the first European player to win the event since  Tony Jacklin of England in 1970.
The U.S. Open is open to any professional, or to any amateur with an up-to-date men's USGA Handicap Index not exceeding 1.4. Players (male or female) may obtain a place by being fully exempt or by competing successfully in qualifying. The field is 156 players.
About half of the field is made up of players who are fully exempt from qualifying. As of the most recent U.S. Open in 2012, the exemption categories are:
The exemptions for amateurs apply only if the players remain amateurs as of the tournament date.
Before 2011, the sole OWGR cutoff for entry was the top 50 as of two weeks before the tournament. An exemption category for the top 50 as of the tournament date was added for 2011, apparently in response to the phenomenon of golfers entering the top 50 between the original cutoff date and the tournament (such as  Justin Rose and  Rickie Fowler in 2010).
Through 2011, exemptions existed for leading money winners on the PGA, European, Japanese, and Australasian tours, as well as winners of multiple PGA Tour events in the year before the U.S. Open. These categories were eliminated in favour of inviting the top 60 on the OWGR at both relevant dates. Starting with the 2012 championship, an exemption was added for the winner of the current year's BMW PGA Championship, the European Tour's equivalent of The Players Championship.
Potential competitors who are not fully exempt must enter the Qualifying process, which has two stages. Firstly there is Local Qualifying, which is played over 18 holes at more than 100 courses around the United States. Many leading players are exempt from this first stage, and they join the successful local qualifiers at the Sectional Qualifying stage, which is played over 36 holes in one day at several sites in the U.S., as well as one each in Europe and Japan. There is no lower age limit and the youngest-ever qualifier was 14-year-old  Andy Zhang of China, who qualified in 2012 after  Paul Casey withdrew days before the tournament.
The purse at the 2012 U.S. Open was $8 million, and the winner's share was $1.44 million. The  European Tour uses conversion rates at the time of the tournament to calculate the official prize money used in their Race to Dubai (€6,433,971 in 2012). In line with the other majors, winning the U.S. Open gives a golfer several privileges that make his career much more secure if he is not already one of the elite players of the sport. U.S. Open champions are automatically invited to play in the other three majors (the  Masters, the Open Championship (British Open), and the  PGA Championship) for the next five years, as well as the  Players Championship, and they are exempt from qualifying for the U.S. Open itself for 10 years. They may also receive a five-year exemption on the PGA Tour, which is automatic for regular members. Non-PGA Tour members who win the U.S. Open have the choice of joining the PGA Tour either within 60 days of winning, or prior to the beginning of any one of the next five tour seasons. Finally, U.S. Open winners receive automatic invitations to three of the five  senior majors once they turn 50; they receive a five-year invitation to the  U.S. Senior Open and a lifetime invitation to the  Senior PGA Championship and  Senior British Open.
The top 10 finishers at the U.S. Open are fully exempt from qualifying for the following year's Open, and the top eight are automatically invited to the following season's Masters.
Willie Anderson,  Bobby Jones,  Ben Hogan and  Jack Nicklaus hold the record for the most U.S. Open victories, with four victories each.  Hale Irwin is the oldest winner of the U.S. Open at 45 years and 15 days in  1990. The youngest winner of the U.S. Open is  John McDermott at 19 years, 10 months and 14 days in  1911.
There is an extensive records section on the official site  here.