This huge Chinese New Year celebration will fill most of the West End with music, acrobatics, activities and pyrotechnics. A grand parade featuring ten lion dance teams will set of from Trafagar Square at 10am, and end up in the heart of Chinatown.
On Wardour Street and Gerrard Street there will be craft stalls, Chinese street food stands and more traditional dance, plus a stage on Shaftesbury Avenue.
On Charing Cross Road there will be musical performances from Chinese Young Culture Ambassadors and a martial arts display as well as crafts and workshops for the whole family.
Regent Street will be celebrating Chinese New Year with a traditional Chinese Wishing Tree which will be stationed on Glasshouse Street from 11am – 3pm.
A traditional Chinese Wishing tree
The ancient tradition of the Wishing Tree is synonymous with good luck and fortune, and the legend goes that hanging your hopes for the coming year on a Wishing Tree will encourage your dreams to come true.
Members of the public are invited to visit the tree and receive a bespoke wish written by an authentic Chinese calligrapher to take home along with a golden chocolate coin, for added good fortune.
The 100 or so restaurants, bars and cafés in the area will have special menus and their own events on offer but book now to avoid disappointment. Sophie Campbell, our London expert, makes her recommendation
Y Ming (020 7734 2721; yming.co.uk) 35-36 Greek Street, W1: This place is small, friendly, not in the least bit interested in being hip and serves northern Chinese food, rather than the Cantonese you normally find in London. The vegetarian options are great and they do a pre-theatre menu for £12.
Try the soft shell crab (£8.50) or the beef with coriander in a wrap (£11). They also say on the menu that if you want Peking Duck done properly it requires four hours' notice, so that's on my wish list.
And I do like dim sum at the Royal China on Queensway, Bayswater (020 7221 2535; rcguk.co.uk), partly because of the workmanlike servicing of huge circular tables full of Chinese families, business people and locals, and partly because they do great dumplings.
I'm a sucker for the Shaolin Monk Hotpot, which has lots of bean curd in it and I always hope will be thrown across the room by a martial artist, and they do the sublime Mango Pudding, loathed by everyone I know except me. I consider it right up there in the culinary pantheon with Jam Roly Poly.
They've got a number of other sites in London. There's a good one on Baker Street.
London has been selected as the first city outside the Far East to host the Magical Lantern Festival, a dazzling extravaganza of lights, music theatre, culture and art.
The Terracotta Army  Photo: Anthony Upton/The Telegraph
Tickets are now on sale from www.magicallantern.uk and runs from Febuary 3 to March 6 at Chiswick House Gardens in west London.
From Sichuan-style vension and sticky pork ribs to fragrant crispy chicken and the most delicious, umami-rich, miso mushrooms. Celebrate the New Year at home with these scrumptious recipes.
Photo: Andrew Crowley
The Royal Mint's latest collection  Photo: Royal Mint
The Royal Mint have even released commemorative lunar coins as part of their Shēngxiào (or Chinese zodiac) collection. It is traditional to exchange tokens and gifts of money in red envelopes at Lunar New Year as a symbol of good wishes for the recipient’s health, wealth and prosperity.
The Lunar Year of the Monkey coins have been designed by British-Chinese artist and printmaker Wuon-Gean Ho. A prominent and popular figure in Chinese culture, the monkey is believed to symbolise luck, honour and wealth. One of the most enduring Chinese literary characters, Sun Wukong, is also known as the Monkey King, who is born from a stone and acquires supernatural powers - the main character in the Chinese classical novel Journey to the West.
The limited run of coins are supplied in bold red packaging, together with a booklet that reveals the customs that inspired the artist.
The new year, also known as the Spring Festival, is marked by the lunisolar Chinese calendar, so the date changes from year to year.
The festivities usually start the day before the New Year and continue until the Lantern Festival, the 15th day of the new year.
The Chinese symbol for monkey
Each Chinese New Year is characterised by one of 12 animals which appear in the Chinese zodiac. The Chinese zodiac is divided into 12 blocks (or houses) just like its western counterpart, but with the major difference being that each house has a time-length of one year instead of one month.
This year it's the Year of the Monkey, the ninth animal in the cycle. The next Year of the Monkey will be in 2028.
1. 新年好 / 新年好 (Xīnnián hǎo)
In Mandarin: /sshin-nyen haoww/  In Cantonese: /sen-nin haow/
2. 恭喜发财 / 恭喜發財 (Gōngxǐ fācái)
In Mandarin: /gong-sshee faa-tseye/  In Cantonese: Kunghei fatchoy /gong-hey faa-chwhy/
3. 步步高升 / 步步高陞 (Bùbù gāoshēng)
A steady rise to high places! — "on the up and up"
In Mandarin: /boo-boo gaoww-shnng /  In Cantonese: /boh-boh goh-sshin /
People born in the Year of the Monkey are characterised as lively, quick-witted, curious, innovative and mischievous, but it is also believed to be one of the most unlucky years in the Chinese calendar.
The general image of people in this zodiac sign is of always being smart, clever and intelligent, especially in their career and wealth.
In addition, their gentleness and honesty bring them an everlasting love life. Although they were born with enviable skills, they still have several shortcomings, such as an impetuous temper and a tendency to look down upon others.
Performers play the dragon dance during the Chinese New Year parade  Photo: KeystoneUSA-ZUMA/Rex Features
Julius Caesar, Leonardo da Vinci, Charles Dickens, Lord Byron, Elizabeth Taylor, Diana Ross, Michael Douglas, Alice Walker, Celine Dion, Tom Hanks, Will Smith, Halle Berry, Christina Aguilera, Owen Wilson, Daniel Craig, Mick Jagger, Bette Davis, Annie Oakley, Eleanor Roosevelt, Cuba Gooding Jr., Gisele Bundchen, Kim Cattrall, Nick Carter, Patricia Arquette, Alyson Stoner, Christina Ricci, Demi Lovato, Miley Cyrus, Nick Jonas, Selena Gomez.
Your sign is derived from the year you were born in the Chinese lunar calendar.
The years below are a rough guide, but if you were born in January or February it may be slightly different as the new year moves between 21 January and February 20.
In Chinese astrology, the 12 animal zodiac signs each have unique characteristics.
A man dressed as the legendary Monkey God of Chinese folklore adjusts his mask and prepares before a show at Seacon Square in Bangkok, Thailand
To be avoided on the first day of the Chinese New Year:
There are 10 large Chinese communities to consider if you fancy celebrating the beginning of the Year of the Monkey in style.
Celebrations have started around the world - and now London is joining the festivities.
A man in a monkey costume climbs one of the lion statues in Trafalgar Square in London  Photo: AP Photo/Frank Augstein
People gathered at one of Hong Kong's best known temples - the Wong Tai Sin - to make their new year wishes, while dancers dressed in traditional costumes performed at Ditan Park in Beijing.
The Sydney Opera House in Australia was bathed in red light as part of city wide lumiere and lantern display to welcome in Chinese New YearLondon has been selected as the first city outside the Far East to host the Magical Lantern Festival, a dazzling extravaganza of lights, music theatre, culture and art. London has been selected as the first city outside the Far East to host the Magical Lantern Festival, a dazzling extravaganza of lights, music theatre, culture and art.