The Hindu New Year marks the celebrations of the New Year according to the Hindu Lunar Calendar. However, the Hindu community is very diverse with people living in different states following divergent cultures and traditions. Therefore, Hindu New Year is not celebrated on one particular date on by different dates in each state or region of the country.
Though, the Hindu community now accepts January 1, which is recognized the world over as the Universal New Year Day, but this has in no way paled the Hindu New Year celebrations. Every state or community refers to their New Year Day by their own names. However, most of the New Year days fall in the month of March–April. Let us have a look at how Hindu New Year is celebrated in different states and by various communities.
In Kashmir, New Year is known as Navreh and is celebrated by the Kashmiri Pandit community. It is celebrated somewhere in the months of March-April. On this day, people prapre a plate which comprises certain items such as unhusked rice, bread, yogurt, salt, sugar, a pen, mirror, flowers, an almanac and a silver coin or money. People upon waking up take a peek at the plate before they begin their day.
Ugadi is a significant festival observed in the south Indian states of Andhra Pradesh, Telengana and Karnataka. It is the first day of Chaitra which is the first month of the year. It is celebrated in the months of March or April. In these states it is believed that Lord Brahma, who comprises the trinity along with Vishnu and Shiva, started the creation of the universe on this day. People wake up at dawn and take a bath. Following this, they apply hair oil. Cleaning and decorating the house and putting raw mango leaves on the doors and buying new clothes forms an important part of the celebrations. But the highlight of the day is the unique dish called Ugadi Pachadi. This scrumptious delicacy comprises neem, raw mango, tamarind, jaggery and is prepared in almost every home.
Gudi Padwa is an important day for Hindus in Maharashta and Goa, as well as Konkanis. Celebrated in the month of March-April, Gudi Padwa marks the day when Lord Brahma created the world following the great deluge. The day is significant from the agricultural point of view as it marks the end of one harvest and the start of another. A prominent sight witnessed on this day is gudi displayed in Maharashtrian households either in a window, terrace or other high place so that it is prominently visible. A gudi is a green or yellow cloth which is tied on a bamboo stick. The other articles that comprise the bamboo stick are sugar crystals, neem leaves and a garland of red flowers. People on this day offer prayers, decorate the house with colorful rangolis.
The Sindhi community in India refers to their New Year as Cheti Chand which celebrates the spirit of togetherness. The day is observed in honor of the birth of Jhulelal, the Sindhi water God. The survival of mankind depends on water and such the Sindhi community worships water on this day. In the evening, the Sindhi community worships Varun, who is the god of water and cosmic order, and sing hymns and songs in his praise.
On the 13th or 14th April every year, Punjab comes alive with the beats of the bhangra and Gidda as Punjabis celebrate their New Year. Known as Baisakhi, the day marks prayers for a good harvest. Some of the highlights of the day include processions, visits to the gurdwara and dance and other performances. This is a very significant day for the Sikh community as it was on this day in 1699 that the tenth Sikh guru, Guru Gobind Singh, laid the foundation of Panth Khalsa, the Order of the Pure Ones.
New Year is referred as Pohela Boishakh in West Bengal and Bangladesh. Usually observed on April 14, the day coincides with the New Year days celebrated in the southern states, Punjab, Kashmir and others. In the State of West Bengal and the neighbouring country of Bangladesh, the day is observed as a state holiday and a national holiday respectively. The Bengali New Year begins at dawn and all through the day processions, fair and song and dances are observed by the Bengali communities all through India and the world. It is a significant day for the business community as start the day with a new ledger.
Usually celebrated in the middle of April, Bohaag Bihu or Rongali Bihu is observed as New Year's Day in Assam. A harvest festival it marks the beginning of the agriculture cycle. Spread over a period of three days, the first day of the festival is dedicated to the cattle, which, especially for the farming community, is a major means of livelihood. The second day is known as Manuh Bihu. Special dishes are made on this day which comprise flattened rice, curd, jaggery and sweets. The third day of the festival is known as Gosain Bihu. It is dedicated to the worship of deities.
Tamils celebrate their New Year as Puthandu. Observed in mid-April, it is the first day of Chithirai which is the first month of the Tamil calendar. To usher in good fortune, People begin the day by viewing precious things such as rice, coconut, silver, gold, betel leaves, jewelery, mirror, vegetables among others. People start preparations for the day in advance and this is done by decorating the house. Mango leaves are an important part of the decorations and can be seen garlanded at the doorways. People visit temples to offer their prayers and also cook the traditional meal of pachadi.
Vishu – the Kerala New Year – is an auspicious day and is celebrated by much fervor by the Malyali community in the state as well as other regions of the country. Vishukani, which means seeing any auspicious sight, is one of the most significant part of the celebrations. Other than this people decorate their homes with lights and burst firecrackers. People indulge in charity by undertaking "Vishukaineetam", which is usually the distribution of coins to the poor and needy people.