For the opening 10 minutes, during which Sergio Aguero scored, Manchester City looked terrific but it proved a false dawn rather than a Blue Moon rising. Manchester United responded superbly, ripping the champions apart, silencing the noisy neighbours, making a mockery of the history books that had seen City win their previous four derbies.
Louis van Gaal’s impact on United is being seen all over the team with vibrant individual displays and good partnerships. Ashley Young’s understanding with Daley Blind on the left continues to impress. Ander Herrera and Juan Mata clearly enjoy working their little passing moves upfield. Chris Smalling and Phil Jones look a more solid axis, although requiring the close stewarding of the hugely important Michael Carrick.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Steve Anglesey - Only highlight of today: United fan behind us in the pub who celebrated two of their goals by shouting " football!"&lt;/noframe&gt;
Gary Neville playing the hits in the Sky Sports post-mortem. "All the evidence is that you cannot play Yaya Toure as part of a midfield two against a good side. Against one of the lesser sides at home, maybe, but if he is going to stay at Man City Pellegrini has to use him differently."
Time to end Ashley Young's England exile
Ashley Young’s Old Trafford has been remarkable, with the former Aston Villa winger emerging from last season’s nightmare under David Moyes to the point where he is not keeping the £59.7m Angel di Maria out of the team.
Louis van Gaal has been rewarded for showing faith in Young with the winger’s performances this term and, with Roy Hodgson watching in the directors’ box, it is time the England manager gave the 29-year-old the chance to relaunch his international career.
Uncapped since his 30th appearance for England in Sept 2013, Young is now showing the form that prompted his move to United and, with a friendly against the Republic of Ireland looming in June, he is playing like an England player again.
Stick around for a bit and we'll bring you the reaction, and the early findings from what is sure to be an in-depth inquest.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Samuel Luckhurst - After so many batterings at the hands of City, that might be remembered as United's 'redemption derby'. Clinical win. &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23mufc" target="_blank"&gt;#mufc&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
FULL TIME: MANCHESTER UNITED 4 MANCHESTER CITY 2 Wow, what a match - and what a huge blow for Man City. Behold the League table and despair, Citizens. City have now lost six of their last eight football matches and are by no means a cert to finish in the top four. Damn that dastardly Financial Fair Play!
Game might be over as a contest but Angel Di Maria has a point to make... Slalom run and low shot that Hart had to grab 100% because United had a man, unmarked, a-lurkin' in the area. And that's the last moment of major incident.
Sir Gary Neville is unhappy with the way that City don't race back to the restart. Consolation, and indeed resignation, seems to be the mood.
GOAL! Lovely goal from City. Nasri with the through ball, Zabaleta excellent run onto it. Cuts it back. Aguero! Another simple finish and that is 100 goals for Manchester City. Fastest player to get there. MANCHESTER UNITED 4 MANCHESTER CITY 2 (Aguero 89)
Carrick has limped off so United are playing with ten
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Simon Hughes - Sky cameras zooming in on Pellegrini's grey eyes like Rose in Titanic before she throws the necklace overboard as an old lady. Emotional.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Mata got a standing ovation.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Phil McNulty - Simliar ovation for Fellaini - who has won over all those doubters inside &amp;amp; outside of OId Trafford by flourishing under Louis van Gaal.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Both signed by a D Moyes of San Sebastián.
The struggling Falcao comes on for the no-longer-struggling Fellaini, who has been magnficent this season and certainly in this game. Lamps sets up Aguero but not much of a shot.
And with about eight minutes to go, it's United who look more like scoring. Oh! The linesman has found some sort of flag and has decided to try waving it. Well what do you know? It makes the referee blow his whistle. Valencia offside.
Mata, excellent once again, comes off for Angel Di Maria. Clichy desperately trying to atone, bombing forward, but to little avail.
Well, City are left holding the string where their balloon used to be when they scored the opener, and there'll be some unhappy campers in Manchester tonight. Lampard's on for Navas. Rojo's on for Jones.
Man dear though. Martin Tyler's pulling out all the stops "TS Eliot wrote that April is the cruellest month... but I don't think he was talking about football"... and I'll leave you to fill in the rest of that. He also wrote "I have measured out my life with coffee spoons." Do one about that, Martin.
GOAL! Taxi for Pellegrini? Freekick from the right, young hits it. City are absolutely all over the shop with their marking, it's a pathetic display, and they've left Chris Smalling totally unattended to glance in the fourth goal. Mangala not in the Wide Awake Club, he's played him onside, but he's done naff all else and that's the end of that. MANCHESTER UNITED 4 MANCHESTER CITY 1 (Smalling 73)
Gary Neville, who should know, says "I've not seen Old Trafford like this for about two years."
Pellegrini looking like a man who sees it all slipping away on the touchline. Dzeko and New York City's favourite son, Frank J Lampard Jr III, are warming up.
That goal was totes offside, for what it's worth. For those of you playing along at home, that makes two offside goals this match for the Super Manchester Reds.
Withdrawing my previous goodwill for M Tyler (see Richie Benaud moment) after he says "United trying to turn it into a demolition derby."
GOAL! City ripped open down their right once again. This time it's a pacy break, Rooney and Mata both with classy touches in the move, and Rooney gives it to the Spaniard... Mata races into the area, Hart comes out, but Mata has slipped it under his body with a pure classy finish. NICE. MANCHESTER UNITED 3 MANCHESTER CITY 1 (Mata 66)
United clear that free and break...
Game continues to be bonkers quick, typified by the performance of A Young, who is either brilliant or ludicrous on a second by second basis. I strongly fancy a punch up at some point. Between the players, that is. I'm not offering you out.
Jones, perhaps due to some sort of government outreach/"second chance" scheme with which I am unfamiliar, has NOT been booked for clattering Milner.
Here's your friend and mine, the man with the child in his eyes, it's Samir Nasri.
There's the boy Navas down the right, he's having a curate's egg of a game, crosses low and wins a corner. That's cleared.
Yaya and Silva teaming up to create a chance for the former. Blocked.
United come again. Barging down the right, crosses, but Young seems to have fallen over himself in the area and has somehow contrived to effect a back header away from the nets rather than the more traditional header AT goal.
Marouane goes up for a header and elbows Dimiechelis right in his handsome, stupid puss. Martin down like a ton of bricks. Actually, on second look, that should be "handsome, playacting puss". He's fine.
The ball delivered into the area. Massive turbo scramble! Great save Hart, from Roonye's freekcik, everyone's bundling in, players are hacking it, claiming for penalties, handballs, dives, yellow cards, face mask fouls, you name it. The result is that nobody gets nothing and it's kicked clear. Carrick alone had about four shots in two seconds. Fernandinho tries to clear and hits a teammate. Buuuuunnnnndle! It's the best league in the world, ladies and genermun
Game's spicing up as Rooney is fouled. And then Navas fouls Mata. Mata leaves the "getting furious" to Rooney, who is angry enough for two.
City making an advance down the left but it's curtailed when Clichy, who once again looks a weak link, fouls Valencia. Perhaps weak link is harsh. More misused link.
City on the front foot, cross comes in from the right, momentarily it looks like curtains for United as Aguero controls it on his chest but it won't quite come down quickly enough (stupid weak gravity - they should play on Jupiter) and the moment passes.
So the players are out for half time. But not so the 100% fit Vince Kompany.
Pictures ahoy! Carrick having a game.
Before the match, Manuel Pellegrini said "Vincent Kompany is 100% fit". Kompany has been subbed at half time. Having that? The lad Mangala comes on. Andrew writes:
We will lose this game. Our defence just isn't good enough and aside from Silva the midfield is lacking. Toure is on/off/on/off, Fernando and Fernandinho don't cut it, Navas is fast but no end product.
Go back two or three years you could look at City's bench and spot 3 game changers. No one on the bench today will make a difference to the team on the pitch. As much as you can point to FFP, those brought in are not as good as those who have gone.
We are not a bad team, but we are not a great team either.
HT: MANCHESTER UNITED 2 MANCHESTER CITY 1 Blinding match, hugely entertaining. Neither side doing much on the whole "defending" side of the sport, but that's for squares anyhow. City took the lead, United have got two back. Shades of offside for the second United goal, maybe?
Dunno, marginal. To even things up, Vincent Kompany should probably have got a straight red, so...
Herrera with super skill and trickery, plays it to Rooney who in turn gives it to Valencia. Ball into the box… City scramble it clear. That's the end of two minutes of added time and the end of a really superb half of Premier League football. Is nice!
Ooh Kompany you are a lucky sausage I am saying. That should have been a red. Glad it isn't, but still. United pump the ball into the CIty box and the Citizens are clinging onto the ropes here.
High tackle on Blind, studs up! Kompany the guilty party, studs showing....The ref is asking his assistant what he reckons. Blind is still on the turf. Might as well get your value for it... and have a rest... What's the ref going to do? It's yellow!
Milner finds Aguero with a through ball but for once, the brilliant Argentine's control is not all it might be. Valencia with a fine covering tackle ensures that he rues that error.
What can City do here? They need to stop Fellaini beasting Clichy. They need to contain Young. Maybe Milner has to drop back more, which is a shame becuase he has been playing well. Pouring with rain there. As United come forward again.
Milner! But he shoots well over. Game had opened up for City, suddenly.
This time City do get the offside shout. Fellaini unplayable in the box, places it through to Rooney, but Sir Spudulike is offside by perhaps half a yard.
Battle of the midfield warrior-enforcers as Silva goes into the book for a late tackle on Mata. A pally shake of hands afterwards. Those two cats are lovers, not fighters.
Oh dear. The last couple of minutes have seen Young, A slice the ball into the stand and then fall on his face.
"End to end stuff, the ref is having to work very hard to keep up with this. He's knackered!" says Gary Neville. Interesting. As players get fitter and fitter and more souped up, how are we going to expect 40 year old men to run alongside them?
Who are you and what have you done with Ashley Young? etc etc. The lad is on FIRE!
GOAL! Brilliant from United and Ashley Young! He's made a mug of Zabaleta down the left, opened it all up with a cute back hell that finds Daley Blind.. Blind plays it back to Young, he crosses, and who's this at the back post? It's the big man Marouane Fellaini, arriving late and it's a mismatch between him and Clichy. Heads it home. Offside? Certainly close. Clichy totally overmatched there, he didnae have a scooby where Big Hair was and City pay the price. MANCHESTER UNITED 2 MANCHESTER CITY 1 (Fellaini 27) Andrew Holgate in 3...2...1...
LOL. The boy Holgate sends an email, empty apart from one solitary smiley.
United charge forward under the steam of the noted football player Phil 'Phil' Jones. The big lad cannot find a pass to match his piston-pumping run.
First booking of the afternoon as Milner sees a yellow for hauling down Herrera, I think it was. United play the ball in but cannot make a lot of headway.
Young up and down that left wing like a man possessed. Aguero also busy. Hot pace still.
Silva putting himself about in the United area, putting them under pressure. Hacked clear, nervously.
Both teams racing into challenges. First Herrera and now De Gea are taken aback by how up for this City are. Pellegrini celebrated that first goal like he really, really meant it. Big game for him. Not saying he'll be sacked if they lose or anything but...
GOAL! But what do you know, United are back in it! The freekick itself doesn't come to anything. City clear, and Navas is running onto the ball. Hart comes out and HOOFS it down the park. United have it down the left. Fellaini knocks it to Herrera, Zabaleta dives in, sells himself. He's beaten. The cross comes in from Ander H. Young gets in front of Clichy and gets something on it. Gets a bit of a break, ball falls for him and he has the presence of mind to hook it in the net. MANCHESTER UNITED 1 MANCHESTER CITY 1 (Young 14)
"Told you," says Andrew Holgate.
Rare break for United. Young on the charge. Fouled by Clichy
City have a freekick maybe 30 yards from goal. Central. Some sort of cunning plan, Demichelis peeling away and trying to loop a header back into the box... with little success.
Been all City, United being over-run here. Simplest chance Aguero will ever have. Think I am right in saying that makes 99 goals for City. Andrew Holgate eyeores:
We'll still lose this.
GOAL! And this time they've done it! Silva running riot down the left, Milner prompting and feeding him brilliantly, lovely reverse pass from Milner. Silva onto it. Low cross. Aguero with a simple tap in. MANCHESTER UNITED 0 MANCHESTER CITY 1 (Aguero 8)
But not for long! It's all City. A chance for Toure from a corner... blocked by De Gea.
Loving the atmos, frantic stuff, crowd bang into it. Proper job. Jesus Navas suddenly finds himself in the clear! Charges down the right, gets onto a long ball from the City midfield. Shoots hard and low at De Gea. Decent save. Corner cleared.
Foul by Clichy and United can advance down the left, Young busy, trying to get a cross in. Ball's played through for Rooney and Hart has to look lively to deny his England colleague. Dives at Rooney's feet. Hart always fave to get there.
City with some neat passing, James Milner is pushing up quite a lot. Kompany with a poor pass.
It'll be the light blue men to kick off. Nice homage to Richie Benaud from Martin Tyler - "the prospects for play? Marvellous".
And here are their Man City opponents.
The players are out on the pitch. Here's how the United ones will line up.
Hope Vinny K is indeed fully fit. Here are the full quotes from Manuel Pellegrini
"We are not thinking about our record here, all I think about is our team playing the same way we want to do. It's important to score the chances we create. We want to have possession, to make good movements and to score - hopefully that all comes together today."
"Kompany is 100%, he worked normally the last couple of days and felt nothing in his groin. Milner is always an important player for us. Today I hope he returns to the team and plays with his normal performance."
Van Gaal: "I prepare the players like I always do - same for Manchester United, same for QPR." Bit rude on the Super Hoops, Louis!
Oh, he is carrying on. "Same for Qpr, same for Chelsea. We look at images of the opponent and of us in training and I prepare them accordingly."
Basically, he's not taking the "derby -> form book -> window" bait.
"Vincent Kompany is 100% fit," says Manuel Pel.
Four wins in a row for City. I don't fancy them for a fifth. What say you?
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: John Nicholson - Feel strongly Utd will win but am terrible at predictions, thus City will win, but now I've predicated that, it means United will win...etc&lt;/noframe&gt;
I suppose I can understand it for a cup final, perhaps. But for a League derby, it does feels wrong. Still, each to their own. Who are we to say how other people should enjoy their Premium Sportataiment Leisure Product.
Some people think that these twin scarves are the greatest evil of our times. What do you think? Thom Gibbs made an excellent counter-argument.
So two changes for Man City. Zabaleta and Milner coming in for Sagna and Dzeko.
And one for United - Smalling takes the place of Rojo.
Good moves? Bad choices?
Loads of good stuff in that Kompany interview. Well worth a look.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: steve_mcfc - &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/alantyers" target="_blank"&gt;@alantyers&lt;/a&gt; What is "pretty remarkable" about Kompany's quotes about FFP? Surely what he said is blatantly obviously true?&lt;/noframe&gt;
(See entry at 14.47)
Fabregas has just hit a late goal (winner?) against poor old QPR.
And here's the team sheet.
Swanky graphics are in!
What's better, readers? A Rooney or an Aguero?
Man United: De Gea, Valencia, Jones, Smalling, Blind, Carrick, Mata, Herrera, Fellaini, Young, Rooney. Subs: Valdes, Rafael, Rojo, McNair, Januzaj, Di Maria, Falcao.
Man City: Hart, Zabaleta, Kompany, Demichelis, Clichy, Fernandinho, Toure, Navas, Milner, Silva, Aguero. Subs: Caballero, Mangala, Kolarov, Fernando, Nasri, Lampard, Dzeko
I'd offer a predicition as to who might win the match but I am still smarting from having tipped Al Co in the National. Who do you think will win? At least football teams don't fall over at the first hurdle. Certain footballers do, I suppose. Ashley Young, I guess.
Pretty remarkable claim from Vincent Kompany today in his exclusivel chat with Telegraph Sport's Jason Burt. Hit it, Jason and Vin:
Vincent Kompany has claimed Uefa’s Financial Fair Play rules were simply an attempt by the established order of big clubs to prevent the likes of Manchester City from competing with them.
“That’s how I look at it anyway,” Kompany told The Sunday Telegraph ahead of Sunday’s derby against Manchester rivals United, who belong to that old order.
If you go into the business world you can’t say to anyone they cannot invest. I understand the fans have to be protected, the clubs have to be protected but plans need to be accepted.
You win things; you get more fans. You get more fans; you create more revenue. That’s not a stupid way of thinking of investing in a business. I do understand there needs to be regulation but I just wonder what is going to change at the top? When I came to England it was just four clubs at the top. Four. The same top four all the time and that’s changed now.”
Afternoon all. The second most important derby match of the afternoon behind Hibs v Hearts is just an hour and 20 minutes away. Who do you fancy?
Alan Tyers will be here from 3pm to count down towards kick-off of the Manchester derby. Until that time comes, feast your eyes and internet browser on Gary Neville's column:
The combined value of the Manchester United and Manchester City squads for Sunday’s 169th Manchester derby will amount to a staggering £732m, but I cannot find an outfield player from either club who would get into my team of the season.
It is around this time of the year that voting forms for the PFA Player and Team of the Year awards are passed around dressing rooms, so it is a poor indictment of both Manchester clubs that the only player I can state a case for is United goalkeeper David de Gea.
Wayne Rooney has had a good season, but not good enough to dislodge Harry Kane or Diego Costa from my team and while the improvement of Marouane Fellaini and Juan Mata, and the solidity of Marcos Rojo, has caught the eye, they haven’t outshone the likes of Eden Hazard, Nemanja Matic or John Terry.
As for City, Joe Hart aside, none of Manuel Pellegrini’s players has come close to performing to the level they would expect of themselves.
Not since the 1989-90 season has the PFA Team of the Year failed to include a player from United or City, so the fact that only De Gea makes my team offers an indication of the state of both clubs as they prepare to meet at Old Trafford.
It feels like the ‘half-full, half-empty’ derby.
Read the rest right here