Rampant Manchester United hit four past defending champions Leicester City as Jose Mourinho's decision to drop captain Wayne Rooney to the bench paid off spectacularly.
In what was by far their best performance since Mourinho's arrival, United were four goals to the good by half-time as Chris Smalling, Juan Mata, Marcus Rashford and Paul Pogba all scored.
After a week of speculation, Rooney was demoted to the bench following a succession of poor performances, with Rashford and Jesse Lingard starting.
That result takes Manchester United into the top three (Leicester are down to 12th), but will they stay there after the 3pm games?
Join me on this link to follow all the live coverage of the 3pm matches as Premier League action continues with six more matches getting underway shortly.
For Old Trafford fall-out check out the homepage, but that's all from me here. I will catch you on the above link shortly. Thanks for following.
90min: There will be three added minutes, with Manchester United cruising to a win that on paper didn't look like it would be as comfortable as it has been.
87min: Final change of the game sees Mata depart to a Jose Mourinho handshake as Ashley Young replaces the midfielder for the final few minutes,
86min: Still Leicester look a little clumsy at the back as Valencia wins the ball down the right, enabling Mata to attack the flank.
His cut-back finds Ibrahimovic but the striker's effort is blocked.
83min: On comes Rooney then to applause from the home fans as he replaces Marcus Rashford, who has not featured much in this half having done his job in the first period.
81min: Even Mourinho must think this game is safe now, Wayne Rooney is getting ready to come on.
Leicester have been much, much better this half since Gray's introduction though as the winger wins a corner on the right after his cross is blocked by Daley Blind.
78min: On comes Carrick at Old Trafford to warm cheers as he replaces Lingard, who departs to loud applause from the home faithful.
77min: First change for Manchester United is on the way as Michael Carrick is stripped down ready to come on. meanwhile Antonio Valencia flashes a cross-shot across goal which just evades the target and an outstretched Ibrahimovic boot at the far post.
At the other end, Gray attempts another outrageous strike very similar to his first goal, but De Gea this time gets fingertips to it, pushing the ball away.
74min: Second yellow card of the game and it comes for Danny Simpson who lunges in with a sliding tackle on Rashford. United are still looking for a fifth goal that would well and truly put this match to bed.
71min: The game has hit a lull now, which suits United of course who are quite happy for this to meander into a 4-1 win. Still no sign of any United changes.
68min: Must do better. Leicester attack the left flank through Schlupp but despite his cut-back finding an unmarked Andy King inside the box, the midfielder can only fire very weakly at De Gea.
Another Leicester goal and this second half might start getting interesting...
67min: Close from Ibrahimovic! The Manchester United striker cuts a first time strike that curls towards the bottom corner at the near post before Ron-Robert Zieler dives low to his left to tip it around the post.
65min: That goal sees Wayne Rooney go for a warm up, but United remain on the attack in this half as Jesse Lingard skies over following an Antonio Valencia cut-back.
62min: Final switch for Leicester City as Jeffrey Schlupp comes on to replace Marc Albrighton.
59min: 'We're gonna win 5-4' chant the Leicester fans , and while that's tongue in cheek their opening goal of the day is arguably the best of the five we have seen so far,
Demarai Gray cuts in from the left before rifling across goal and into the top corner from 30 yards. It's an astonishing effort that left David de Gea no chance.
57min: The Manchester United defence hasn't had much to do today but Eric Bailly has looked solid as a rock.
What a signing he looks already. First he stands like a brick wall to halt a mazy Gray run on the edge of the box, then he times a tackle superbly to halt a Foxes attack through the middle.
56min: I wonder what Wayne Rooney makes of this by the way. With Manchester United having finally clicked with him on the bench, it doesn't look like he will be back in the starting XI anytime soon.
Ibrahimovic tees up Juan Mata inside the box, but his shot is blocked before the Fixes win a free-kick.
53min: At least Ranieri's words have had some affect on his players. Pogba clips a delightful cross towards the far post, but just as it looks like Zlatan Ibrahimovic is going to head home, Huth gets a vital touch to take the ball away from the striker.
50min: First booking of the game and it's Robert Huth collecting the prize after bringing down Paul Pogba with a sliding challenge.
Leicester City are the first PL reigning champions to have conceded four goals in a PL match before half-time. #MnuLei
48min: Leicester are set-up to stop this from becoming an even worse situation for them than it already is. A quite opening to the half - but then this was the case in the first period.
Leicester City have a Champions League match mid-week and they make two changes as Riyad Mahrez and Jamie Vardy are replaced by Demarai Gray and Andy King.
Damage limitation time for the Foxes, who were out three minutes early for the second half...
Four goals and Ibrahimovic is not among any of them. The striker has looked sharp and missed with a couple of volley attempts.
Maybe the one that would normally bash them into the top corner is part of the crowd. Check out this dead ringer who invaded the pitch during the game
4 - @ManUtd have scored four goals before half-time in a Premier League game for the first time since Dec 1st 2012 (4-3 v Reading). Rout.
45min: Bad news for Leicester is there will be two additional minutes for them to defend at the end of the first half - and what a half it has been from the Red Devils. It's now definitley their best under Mourinho.
42min: Three of Manchester United's goals have now come from corners, as Paul Pogba now heads home his first United goal after getting in front of Christian Fuchs to nod home a Daley Blind corner. Absolute shambles at the back from the Foxes.
40min: Brutal. Claudio Ranieri will be fuming with his Leicester side here! The defence simply falls asleep as United take a short corner, with the low pass towards the near post turned across the face of goal by Mata before Marcus Rashford slides home.
37min: This is like the old Manchester United! They are dominating this encounter now and after Pogba finds Lingard inside the box, the midfielder squares for Juan Mata to drill home across goal and give the hosts a deserved 2-0 lead.
'For all the big names on show at Old Trafford - Pogba, Zlatan, Rashford etc - the United fans have been chanting the name of Ander Herrera. His inclusion instead of Fellaini has been as influential as any other team selection made by Mourinho
'This United XI is some blend - three Ferguson signings, three Mourinho signings, two LVG's, a Moyes and two homegrown players. Gelling together well so far.'
31min: Still the United chances keep coming. Pogba is getting in on the act now as his 30-yard stinger is well pushed behind by Zieler. This is arguably United's best first half of the season so far.
28min: United are all over Leicester now. Paul Pogba chips a perfect pass into the box for Ibrahimovic, whose run catches the Leicester defence completely square.
The Swede turns on the ball while controlling it, but his volley flies just over the crossbar. What a goal that would have been!
25min: Bring back Rooney, this Rashford kid will never make it.
I jest of course but the 18-year-old should be doubling United's lead here. Ander Herrera releases Zlatan Ibrahimovic down the left on the counter attack, who then squares for Rashford.
The striker though fails to control the ball and he slices badly wide in front of Zieler.
22min: There's the breakthrough for Manchester United and Leicester, and in Wayne Rooney's absence it's the captain for the day that's got the opening goal.
Daley Blind curls an outswinging corner into the box and there to head home is Chris Smalling.
18min: Half-chance for Leicester. A failure to clear a corner sees a return pass pumped high into the box, but the ball falls for Robert Huth whose first time strike is well over the crossbar. Stick to defending, Bob...
15min: Still not much drama on the pitch, with Leicester playing on the counter attack but not quite making the most of it.
The Foxes are turning over possession but their passes out wide, especially to Albrighton have been found wanting so far.
'Paul Pogba has probably had his best 10 minutes in a United shirt. He seems to be playing with more license to run with the ball than we've seen and the crowd are responding.'
10min: Half chance for Leicester City. The ball rather fortunately falls for Marc Albrighton on the left, but despite a one-two his resulting cross is then easily taken by David de Gea,
7min: First corner for United, which Juan Mata swings in to the centre, only for Zieler to punch clear.
The ball is soon floated back into the box by Mata but Zlatan Ibrahimovic's back post volley is well off target. Not an easy chance for the Swede though who had to adjust with the ball dropping behind him.
4min: Still no chances but there is a shot. Daley Blind tries his luck with a 25-yard drive but it never looked like troubling Ron-Robert Zieler as the ball fizzes well over the crossbar.
3min: Even enough start at Old Trafford, with the Manchester United players now having names on the back of their shirt more recognisable.
United have the early possession but no chances yet.
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more.
The players are in the tunnel. Here we go! #MUFC #MUNLEI https://t.co/7D6OTSQORK
...and that's because the players arrived on the pitch with shirts displaying names of the club mascots they walked out with.
It's a nice touch for the mascots, now go and buy a Corvette...
Our #ChevroletMascots have arrived at #OldTrafford and are ready for their shirt swap moment with #mufc! pic.twitter.com/uWCq1kk2lv
Jose Mourinho was angry and could no longer contain his feelings. So, after a crucial match had ended, he walked into a packed press conference, chose his words carefully and publicly criticised one of his players.
‘When he scored the goal, the game finished for him,’ Mourinho said. ‘After that, I needed 11 players for my defensive organisation and I had just 10. He has to improve when the team need him to be part of defensive organisation.
Those words were delivered by Mourinho on October 3, 2004 and they were about Joe Cole. He had just scored Chelsea’s winner against Liverpool. Cole had been given some praise but the fact he had not continued to do his job led Mourinho to be brutally honest.
ADAM SHERGOLD: Marcus Rashford has set his sights on becoming the 'ultimate striker' for Manchester United and wants to play in positions right across the forward line.
The 18-year-old exploded onto the scene last season with eight goals for United and has continued his excellent scoring record with three more under Jose Mourinho this term.
Rashford's goals earned him a place in Roy Hodgson's England squad for the European Championship, having made his senior international debut just a few weeks before.
#MUTVHD: Watch as #MUFC put in final preparations ahead of today's game. #MUNLEI https://t.co/LkCb3gYhmC
'The last 10 transfer windows have been managed by four different managers. What you've got here at the moment are four different managers of players, Neville told Sky Sports.
'You've got a plate that's got Bolognese on it, chicken tikka masala, a roast dinner with a load of curry and gravy thrown over the top and individually they are quite nice. But together he [Jose Mourinho] has got to find out which bits of the plate he doesn't like.'
3 - Jamie Vardy has scored in three of his four games against Manchester United for Leicester City in all competitions. Menace. pic.twitter.com/624itfYU7X
Rob Beasley's book — Jose Mourinho: Up Close And Personal — has rocked football with its fascinating insight into what makes the game’s most controversial manager tick.
He exchanged regular emails and texts with the Special One and these conversations are revealed again by Sportsmail, showing just how close he came to landing the England job.
Supporters have been invited before the game to display their views on whether Rooney should be dropped by simply placing a sticker in the yes or no section.
Maybe a few Leicester City fans got involved with the no side?
'I knew the question would be Rooney. But the question should be [Jesse] Lingard and [Marcus] Rashford, two young English players in the line-up,' Mourinho told Sky Sports.
'They are quick and the game is going to be intense and fast and the way they stretch the game.
'When our main striker is Zlatan [Ibrahimovic] today we need fast people to surround him.
'The last thing I want to do as a manager is to hurt players or create negative situations for the them.'
#MUTVHD: Watch as #MUFC arrive for today's clash against the champions... #MUNLEI https://t.co/p4kC7YaGYD
Congratulations to @JuanMata8, who makes his 150th @PremierLeague start. #MUFC #MUNLEI pic.twitter.com/ylAR7kOYOX
Jose Mourinho takes the axe to his Manchester United team that collapsed to a 3-1 defeat at Watford last weekend.
Wayne Rooney is the highest profile of the players dropped as the skipper misses out along with Marouane Fellaini and the injured Luke Shaw and Anthony Martial.
Coming into the side are Daley Blind, Ander Herrera, Juan Mata and Jesse Lingard.
Leicester City by contrast are unchanged from the team that defeated Burnley 3-0 last weekend.
Man Utd: De Gea, Valencia, Bailly, Smalling, Blind, Ander Herrera, Pogba, Lingard, Mata, Rashford, Ibrahimovic.Subs: Rojo, Rooney, Carrick, Young, Romero, Fosu-Mensah, Fellaini.
Leicester: Zieler, Simpson, Morgan, Huth, Fuchs, Mahrez, Amartey, Drinkwater, Albrighton, Vardy, Slimani.Subs: Hernandez, King, Hamer, Schlupp, Okazaki, Gray, Ulloa.
The teams are in! Here's how #MUFC will line up this afternoon. #MUNLEI pic.twitter.com/WabgI7wEXO
Full team news is coming next, with early reports suggesting Wayne Rooney has indeed been dropped by Jose Mourinho. Full confirmation of that VERY shortly...
Of course these sides have already met this season in the Community Shield on an afternoon when Manchester United triumphed 2-1 courtesy of goals from Jesse Lingard and Zlatan Ibrahimovic.
It's gone a little sour since then for United, while Leicester have since shown glimpses of the form that made them Premier League champions.
IAN LADYMAN: Jose Mourinho claims that England captain Wayne Rooney is being worn down by constant criticism of his performances.
Manchester United manager Mourinho warned Rooney on Friday that he will only be picked on merit and not reputation at Old Trafford.
But the United boss went on to make the extraordinary claim that one of the most experienced and battle- hardened players in the Premier League is being affected by what his manager believes is excessive criticism from outside the club.
It's of course their Old Trafford playlist in the build up to today's game.
There are some absolute corkers on the list today, some of which have been chosen by boxer Anthony Crolla.
There's a joke somewhere about Manchester United fans and track No 8, but I will leave that one to you guys...
Check out the tunes on today's #OTplaylist - featuring selections from our guest DJ, @Ant_Crolla! pic.twitter.com/PMI0ecAUdd
To drop or not to drop? That is the big question for Jose Mourinho. Following a series of below standard performances from Wayne Rooney, the pressure is on the Manchester United manager to drop his struggling captain.
But will Jose keep faith and give him another chance against Premier League champions Leicester City or will the axe be dropped on the England skipper?
Good morning all and welcome to Sportsmail's live coverage of Manchester United vs Leicester City from Old Trafford.
Manchester United will attempt to arrest their recent Premier League slump as champions Leicester City head to Old Trafford on Saturday lunchtime.
Jose Mourinho's side suffered back-to-back losses to Manchester City and Watford as their expensive new players struggle to settle.
Claudio Ranieri's Leicester have made a slightly sluggish start, suffering losses to Hull City and Liverpool, though they beat Burnley 3-0 last weekend.
Join DAN RIPLEY for all the action as it happens, with updates from our correspondents OLIVER HOLT, JOE BERNSTEIN and CHRIS WHEELER at Old Trafford.