Windows 10 started to roll out to consumers on 29 July 2015.
The news of a July release came as little surprise to Microsoft watchers, as the company had stated the release would come in summer 2015, and AMD's CEO Lisa Su tipped the world off to a July launch thanks to a slip of the tongue during an earnings call in April that year.
The RTM build was delivered to OEM partners to image new devices on 15 July, and another build is being delivered to retailers to upgrade unsold devices currently running Windows 8.1.
The first end users to get the finished version of the product were the five million Windows 10 Insiders using the operating system in a preview. Following that, Redmond began offering the upgrade to Windows 7, 8 and 8.1 users.
One year after the initial launch of Windows 10, Microsoft rolled out the Anniversary Update, which introduced useful tweaks but was a little light on new feautes. You can read our full review of the Windows 10 Anniversary Update here.
Volume licensing customers are able to download Windows 10 Enterprise and Windows 10 Education from the Volume Licensing Service Center (VLSC).
System requirements for Windows 10 can be found here.
As with its predecessors, Windows 10 is available in various different versions: Windows 10 Home, Windows 10 Mobile, Windows 10 Pro, Windows 10 Enterprise, Windows 10 Education and Windows 10 Mobile Enterprise.
Windows 10 Home is the standard edition of Windows for consumer PCs, tablets and hybrids such as the Surface 3 and upcoming Surface Pro 4. This version of the OS features personal assistant Cortana, Edge browser, Continuum and Windows Hello facial recognition, as well as standard Universal Apps like Mail, Calendar, Photos and Maps.
Windows 10 Mobile, which had until now been known as Windows 10 for Phones, "is designed to deliver the best user experience on ... smartphones and small tablets", according to Microsoft. It has many of the same features as Windows 10 Home, although Continuum is only be available on large mobile devices.
Windows 10 Pro is aimed at small businesses and includes all the features of Windows 10 Home plus device and app management, data protection services, and support for remote and mobile working.
Microsoft is doing everything it can to ensure that Windows 10 retains its core market of enterprise users.
One of the major shake-ups that Windows 10 has brought to the standard Windows formula is the system of regular, incremental updates, rather than large periodic overhauls (although there are occasionally larger feature updates, like Anniversary Update).
However, a constant series of rolling upgrades can be a huge headache for IT departments. In order to combat this, Microsoft has introduced Update for Business, which allows IT managers to fine-tune which devices and systems in their company receive Windows updates at which time.
The tool, which was announced at Microsoft's Ignite conference in early May, allows the specification of maintenance windows in business environments, which can be used to designate when and when not to apply updates. This ensures that systems will be available at critical times and that machines can be unobtrusively kept up to date.
Microsoft has also addressed potential compatibility queries, stating that the new tools will fully integrate with existing management software like System Center and Enterprise Mobility Suite.
Windows 10 is also being supported in the enterprise by third parties including VMWare, Dell, HP Inc and IBM.
Project A2 (pronounced A-squared), a mobile-centric product that aims to speed up business adoption of Windows 10, has been developed by VMWare.
The product deploys VMWare's application delivery software to aid IT departments in moving physical Windows applications into the cloud, and EMM software AirWatch to manage applications and devices.
In early September 2015, Dell agreed to sell the Surface Pro range alongside its own tablet offerings, as Microsoft pushes the Windows 10-running device at the enterprise, while other agreements with Avanade, HP and Accenture under a Surface Enterprise Initiative will push more Windows 10 devices to business users.
Windows 10 Anniversary Update was released on 2 August 2016, just a few days after the operating system's first birthday. It features a number of tweaks and new features, such as Windows Ink and updates for Cortana and the Edge browser - you can read our full review here.
The Anniversary Update was originally uncovered by Brad Sams of Neowin in April 2015, at which time it was going under the codename "Redstone", apparently in reference to the precious stone that features in Minecraft - the block-based game acquired by Microsoft in 2014.
The August Anniversary Update was thought to be the first of two "Redstone" updates that would happen in 2016, with the second one arriving in October. However, rumour soon spread that the launch of the autumn 2016 update had been pushed back to spring 2017. This has seemingly been confirmed by Microsoft technology evangelist Nathan Mercer in a blog post, in which he promises two major feature updates next year, giving businesses time to adapt to the new OS and the features released in August before additional changes are made.