You have got to be kidding me. I have lived in both Columbus and Cincinnati, and I bleed Red and Black. But you have seriously got to be kidding me...
The Reds have been so successful in the past because generations of people in Ohio, Indiana, KY, WV, Tenn, etc. have grown up listening to games on 700WLW and making the 1-3 hour drive a few times a year to go to a game.
WLW has a 50,000 Watts of power pumping through their antennae. Back before TV was the most powerful medium for sports WLW was able to be heard at night through the Eastern United states, with one of the DJ's receiving a call from Hawaii in 1985.
America was baseball crazy for almost 100 years. It's the national pastime and through that time not only were the Reds competitive from their inception up until about 1996, but they also had a superstition able to reach all the rural areas of  of the south with their broadcasts. People were able to hear the The ole left hander rounding third and heading for home nightly.
The Reds had NO competition for much of its existence to which their fan base over 100 years could organically grow to reach Kentucky, Indiana, Tennessee, and West Virginia. The Reds did not go into these states and try to recruit fans. Cincinnati happened to be the closest team to most of them.
It should come as no shock that Cleveland could not replicate these results as the market up there is saturated with Detroit, Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh.
The Atlanta Braves, Hawks and Falcons draw from the whole southeast
Look at their location, they have no competition, and have years to develop their fan base. Turner also put all Braves games on TV on his station which was big in the south.
OSU draws fans from all over the state and region, they don't just rely on Columbus.
110 years of success, large alumni base, and lots of championships will give that school large fan bases all over the world. They have 60,000 students after all.
The fact that you don't think 19,000 people paying to watch a Division 3 soccer match 1.5 hours away from your MLS stadium with 14,000 people in it is an opportunity missed, means I'll never convince you.
FCC has one thing going for it that the Crew don't and that is Nippert Stadium. The Wrigley of the NCAA. Not only are your tickets much cheaper, not only do you have students on campus for a portion of your season, but you are also in one of the best stadiums in the nation, with a TON of activities do do within walking distance.
The Crew were pioneers, and at a time when the MLS might fold they built a stadium on a piece of land that was given to them. Unfortunately it is in a field off the highway that has nothing for a family to do before or after the game. There is nothing to keep the families in the area. CUF has a ton of new development, some great restaurants, and even a walk around campus is great.
If Papa Lindner does not get the team into the MLS, and after the shiny new team effect wears off. What do you think will happen to those 19,000 person crowds? I am already mad enough that a USL team will force my season seat at Nippert to be removed, but all these FCC fans come out of the woodwork and disrespect the Crew.