New Year 2016 is one the way and people are feelings eager to welcome the fresh New Year 2016. In this auspicious occasion of New Year, you’ll surely like to send New Year 2016 SMS Messages to your beloved and closed ones to wish them Happy New Year.
Here we are presenting the several collections of Happy New Year 2016 SMS Messages for you which you can send to the people on this New Year 2016.New Year marks the beginning of a new Gregorian calendar year. Celebrated universally every year on January 1 in various innovative ways, the trend to observe this date as an important day in the calendar has spread globally. People at midnight hold special events, entertaining activities and grand celebrations to welcome the New Year. In many regions of the world, it is celebrated as a public holiday and the offices, institutions and commercial activities remain closed to observe Happy New Year.
"In everything there must be a season, a time to come and a time to go,
I pray that this New Year brings to you happiness and joy forever and ever."
"Let’swelcome the year which is fresh, let’s welcome the year which is fresh and new,
Let’scherish each moment it beholds, let’s celebrate this blissful New Year."
"Lighten up your surroundings with your sweet smile,
And make way for happiness with your good deeds this New Year,
Happy New Year!"
"I wish that not a single tear trickles down your cheek this New Year,
May you be blessed with joy and happiness all the year round."
"In this New Year, I wish you achieve all your goals in life,
And get success at every step of life, enjoy a rocking year."
"May god gift you a style to convert your dream into reality in this New Year,
Wish you Happy New Year."
"May happy times and warm memories brighten your new year,
Have a great year, Happy New Year!"
"Wish you a happy new year, May every good present day,
Becomes a treasure for a better tomorrow,
Happy New Year!"
"Forget the pains, sorrows, and sadness behind,
Let us welcome this New Year with big smile,
Wish you Happy New Year!"
"Wish you receive god is greatest bliss, life is happiest moments,
And luck is greatest favors this year, Wish you Happy New Year!"
"Hope the New sun of the New Year and the new moon of the New Year,
Brings good fortune and great luck for you, Wish you Happy New Year!"
Sending New Year 2016 SMS Messages carrying beautiful quotes is relatively a modern practice which is much popular. People exchange New Year Greeting cards to send warm New Year wishes that are easily available both in stores. Many prefer to scour for innovative and lovely New Year gifts and cards to send warm New Year greetings to their family members and friends. Apart from sending cards and gifts the event is also celebrated by arranging luscious feast that includes various delicious handmade items.
"Year Come and Go, But this Year I Specially Wish U Your Health And,
Happier Topped With Loads of Good Fortune, Have A Great Year Ahead,
Happy New Year!!"
"New Year gives you the perfect opportunity to start afresh,
Grab the chance and make the world a better place for you and yours,
Happy New Year!"
"This New Year may all your troubles vanish like magic,
May you reach out to great glories and achieve all that you desire,
Happy New Year!"
"I wish you scatter happiness all 365 days and get the same in return,
As well throughout this New Year, Wish you a Happy New Year!!"
"Beauty..
Freshness..
Dreams..
Truth..
Imagination..
Feeling..
Faith..
Trust..
This is beginning of a new year!
“Happy new year”
"Memorable moment r celebrated together,
U r my best friend for now & forever,
Make me Miss U even more this New Year,
Hope this year bring Happiness for you Dear."
"What the future holds for us,
depends on what we hold for the,
future. May all your days be,
beautiful and bright.. Keep your,
face to the sunshine Let a series,
beautiful and bright.. Keep your,
of happy thoughts run through,
your mind. They will show on your face,
HAPPY NEW YEAR."
"HAPPY NEW YEAR,
H ours of happy times with friends and family,
A abundant time for relaxation,
P prosperity,
P plenty of love when you need it the most,
Y youthful excitement at life simple pleasures,
N nights of restful slumber (you know – don’t’ worry be happy),
E everything you need,
W wishing you love and light,
Y ears and years of good health,
E enjoyment and mirth,
A angels to watch over you,
R remembrances of a happy years!"
"A mother had a slender, small,
body, but a large heart – a heart so,
large that everybody’s grief and,
everybody’s joy found welcome in
HAPPY NEW YEAR"
"Ring out the old, ring in the new,
Ring, happy bells, across the snow:
The year is going, let him go;
Ring out the false, ring in the true,
“Happy new year”
"We spend January 1 walking,
through our lives, room-by-room,
drawing up a list of work to be,
done, cracks to be patched,
Maybe this year, to balance the,
list, we ought to walk through the,
rooms of our lives… not looking for,
flaws, but for potential,
Happy New Year.."
"I Wish in this new year God gives You,
12 Month of Happiness,
52 Weeks of Fun,
365 Days Success,
8760 Hours Good Health,
52600 Minutes Good Luck,
3153600 Seconds of Joy…and that’s all!"
"Hearty wishes..,
May almighty ponder upon u,
with his marvelous blessings,
give u Health, Wealth, Peace & Happiness,
Wishing u & family a prosperous new year!"
A 1st Card 4u
*!""""'""'""'""'!*
*! .+""+.+""+.  !*
*!  +  HAPPY +  !*
*!  "+ 2016 +"  !*
*!     "+"      !*
*!   NEW YEAR   !*
*!==============!*
IN ADVANCE
"When you proclaim your new year Resolution,
I will be wishing you a New Year that makes,
Your Resolutions true and bring happiness to,
You Merry Christmas and Happy New Year,
“Happy new year”
"Kabhi hasati hai to kabhi rulati hai,
ye zindgi bhi na jaane kitne rang dekhati hai,
haste hai to bhi ankhon mein nami aa jaati hai,
na jaane ye kaisi yaadein hai jo dil mein bas jaati hai,
dua karte hai is naye saal k avsar per,
mere doston k labon per sada muskaan rahe,
kyoki unki her muskurahat hamin khushi de jaati hai."
"Like birds, let us, leave behind what we don’t need to carry… ,
GRUDGES SADNESS PAIN FEAR and REGRETS, 
Life is beautiful, Enjoy it. HAPPY NEW YEAR in advance."
"Aâpke life mein mithââs ho “Câdbury Silk” jâise,
Rounak ho “ Berger silk” jâise, 
Mehak ho “GUCCI ” jaise,
Tazgi ho “Colgate” jaise,
Aur tension-free rahe “Huggies” jâise! 
HÂPPŸ NEW YEÂR 2016."
"In every thing there must be a season,
a time 2come and a time 2go,
I pray that this New Year brings,
2you happiness and joy 4ever and ever,
HÂPPŸ NEW YEÂR 2016."
"My wishes for you are not limited to just the next year ,
but to all the years that you experience in your lifetime and in your reincarnations,
Have a fun-filled, smashing, rocking and happening New Years!"
"New Year is not about changing the Dates but Direction;,
It's not about changing the Calendar but Commitment;
It's not about changing the Actions but Attitude;
It's not about changing the Fruit but Faith, Force and Focus!
May you Commit and Create the best New Year ever!"
Here we presented the numerous collections of Happy New Year SMS  2016 for you to send to your beloved on this prosperous occasion of New Year 2016, Happy New Year!!