She lost out to Ben Haenow during last week's X Factor final.
But Fleur East hasn't let the disappointing result get her down and is relishing in the exposure the ITV singing competition has given her, enjoying a fun-filled night out at Bodo's Schloss in west London on Saturday.
The 26-year-old singer was joined by her sister Kesha and a group of friends as they celebrated her success on the show at the posh venue.
Celebrating in style: X Factor runner-up Fleur East enjoyed a night out at Bodo's Schloss in London with her sister Kesha and a group of friends on Saturday
Bionda Castana cream Dekota leather and mesh heels
Buy a pair at Net-a-Porter now!
Fleur East may have narrowly missed out on winning the X-Factor, but she won in the style stakes week after week, wearing designer gear that was totally drool-worthy. A girl after Fashion Finder's own heart.
Since bursting onto the scene at judges' houses, Fleur has wowed us with her innate sense of style. She's rocked Givenchy, Versace, Moschino and Fausto Puglisi just to name a few! All pretty cool and expensive for an up and coming pop starlet...
And it was no different when she stepped out in Bionda Castana heels.
These shoes are a bit of a cult item with stylish women like Malin Akerman, Olivia Palermo and Kim Kardashian all owning a pair. And now Fleur has joined their gang, rocking them with an all-white ensemble that is so chic this season. So why not jump on board too and click to buy them at Net-a-Porter?
In a nude tone they'll work with everything in your wardrobe from your little black dress to your boyfriend jeans.
KG Kurt Geiger nude lace up heels
Carvela cream heels at John Lewis
Qupid python cut-out lace-up pointed toe booties
Fleur opted for a sophisticated look comprising a cream pencil skirt with a thigh-high split and a white polo neck top.
She paired the look with a gold necklace and matching hoop earrings, setting off the outfit with pointy white shoes.
The star looked like she was having a great time and was the centre of attention as the group enjoyed a sit-down meal before hitting the dancefloor.
A toast to success: Fleur and her pals were sipping of Mahiki rum cocktails all night
Sister act: The talented singer was joined by her sister Kesha, who was rocking the same enviable curls
Uptown dr-unk: Fleur lost out to Ben Haenow during last week's final, but took her defeat graciously
The lookalike siblings got snap happy as they sipped on cocktails made with Mahiki Rum.
She might have finished in second place, but Fleur had every reason to smile since her stint on The X Factor earned her a number one single before even leaving the competition.
Her version of Mark Ronson's Uptown Funk went straight to the top of the iTunes chart after her killer performance in the semi-finals.
Injecting some sparkle: The 26-year-old singer, who was mentored by Simon Cowell, kept the party going
Drinks on me: The star and her friends tucked into a sit-down meal before throwing some shapes
Centre of attention: Kesha got snap happy on her phone as the gang enjoyed their night out
All smiles: Fleur has been relishing in her success after spending a decade trying to make it in music
The DJ was forced to rush release his new single, which was due to drop in January, and wasn't too happy about it initially.
Mark told NME: 'I realised this girl's cover's going to come out before our own.
'So yeah, for a minute I was a little bit annoyed and then we kind of rushed ours, which is good 'cause I think whatever it took to get the song out.'
Well-deserved: The star first appeared on The X Factor back in 2005 as part of girl group Addictive Ladies
She's got promise: Fleur's version of Uptown Funk scored her a number one in the iTunes chart
Controversy: The track was yet to be released by Mark Ronson at the time, who was forced to bring forward the release date of his single