If we explore the US
culture through the lens of the 6-D Model©, we can get a good overview of the
deep driving factors of American culture relative to other cultures in our
world. By supplying you with this information please realise that culture
describes a central tendency in society. Everybody is unique, yet social
control ensures that most people will not deviate too much from the norm.
Moreover, within every country regional cultural differences exist, also in the
States. Americans, however, don’t need to go to a cultural briefing before
moving to another state successfully.
The fact that everybody
is unique implies that we are all unequal. One of the most salient aspects of
inequality is the degree of power each person exerts or can exert over other
persons; power being defined as the degree to which a person is able to
influence other people’s ideas and behavior.
This dimension deals with
the fact that all individuals in societies are not equal, and it expresses the attitude of the culture
toward these power inequalities amongst us.  Power
distance is defined as the extent to which the less powerful members of
institutions and organisations within a country expect and accept that power is
distributed unequally. It has to do with the fact that a society’s inequality
is endorsed by the followers as much as by the leaders.
The fundamental issue
addressed by this dimension is the degree of interdependence a society maintains among its
members. It has to do with
whether people´s self-image is defined in terms of “I” or “We”. In
Individualist societies people are only supposed to look after themselves and
their direct family. In Collectivist societies people belong to “in groups” that
take care of them in exchange for unquestioning loyalty.
The fairly low score on
Power Distance(40) in combination with one of the the most Individualist (91) cultures in the
world reflects itself in the following:
A high score (Masculine) on this dimension indicates that the society will be driven by competition, achievement and success, with success being defined by the “winner” or “best-in-the-field”. This value system starts in childhood and continues throughout one’s life – both in work and leisure pursuits.
A low score (Feminine) on the dimension means that the dominant values in society are caring for others and quality of life. A Feminine society is one where quality of life is the sign of success and standing out from the crowd is not admirable. The fundamental issue here is what motivates people, wanting to be the best (Masculine) or liking what you do (Feminine).
The score of the US on
Masculinity is high at 62, and this can be seen in the typical American
behavioral patterns. This can be explained by the the combination of  a high Masculinity drive together with the
most Individualist drive in the world. In other words, Americans, so to
speak,  all show their Masculine drive
individually. The British, however, have the same culture in this respect. The
question, therefore, should be: is the same drive not normally to be seen on
the surface? This difference is a reflection of the higher score of the US on
Uncertainty Avoidance than of the UK. In other words, in both societies we find
the same drive, but Americans show it up-front whereas the British will take
you by surprise.
This American combination
reflects itself in the following:
The dimension Uncertainty Avoidance has to do with the way that a society deals with the fact that the future can never be known: should we try to control the future or just let it happen? This ambiguity brings with it anxiety and different cultures have learnt to deal with this anxiety in different ways.  The extent to which the members of a culture feel threatened by ambiguous or unknown situations and have created beliefs and institutions that try to avoid these is reflected in the score on Uncertainty Avoidance.
The US
scores below average, with a low score of 46, on the Uncertainty Avoidance
dimension. . As a consequence, the perceived context in which Americans find
themselves will impact their behaviour more than if the culture would have
either scored higher or lower. Thus, this cultural pattern reflects itself as
follows:
This dimension describes how every society has to maintain some links with its own past while dealing with the challenges of the present and future, and societies prioritise these two existential goals differently. Normative societies. which score low on this dimension, for example, prefer to maintain time-honoured traditions and norms while viewing societal change with suspicion. Those with a culture which scores high, on the other hand, take a more pragmatic approach: they encourage thrift and efforts in modern education as a way to prepare for the future.
The United States scores normative on the fifth dimension with a low score of 26. This is reflected by the following:
One challenge that confronts humanity, now and in the past, is the degree to which small children are socialised. Without socialisation we do not become “human”. This dimension is defined as the extent to which people try to control their desires and impulses, based on the way they were raised. A tendency toward a relatively weak control over their impulses is called “Indulgence”, whereas a relatively strong control over their urges is called “Restraint”. Cultures can be described as Indulgent or Restrained.
The United States scores as an
Indulgent (68) society on the sixth dimension. This, in combination with a normative
score, is reflected by the following contradictory attitudes and behaviour: