Jordan Henderson - who made his first appearances after being named club captain - set up Adam Lallana with a rabona pass, before Divock Origi scored a powerful header to make it 4-0 as the game turned to farce in the rain.
Liverpool's next game is against the Brisbane Roar on Friday.
It's all over in Bangkok, where Liverpool have survived some horrendous conditions to win comfortably.
Lallana and Origi added to first half goals from Markovic and Sakho to win the game by four goals to nil, and there were plenty of positives for Rodgers to take from this despite it looking patently obvious that his team are only at the beginning of their pre-season friendlies. Next up for Liverpool are Brisbane Roar on Friday, before they face Adelaide United on Monday.
Liverpool's new signings all fared well and will be pleased to have some game time under their belts. Fans will be looking forward to seeing Roberto Firmino as well.
GOAL!! 4-0 to Liverpool!! (Origi) Another header from a corner, Origi rises high at the back post to power a header home. It's not great defending: he is barely marked and the man on the line arguably could have done better, but take nothing away from Origi who has got his goal.
That comes after Maguire gets away down the left and crosses for Henderson who forces a decent save from the goalkeeper to earn the corner.
And here's a screen grab of James Milner doing his best face-plant:
A spell of pressure for the hosts, with Martin Skrtel forced into a string of clearances and Joe Allen booked for a foul in a dangerous area, but they deal with the danger. It is ridiculously wet out there now so you could forgive Liverpool for any mistakes they do make.
The ball is stopping in puddles all over the place and skidding off the surface in others, while the pitch is cutting up awfully. If anything, at least this levels the playing field a little.
Divock Origi has been very lively but rather wasteful. He goes clean through on goal, controlling the ball well with his head, before lifting the ball over an onrushing goalkeeper but only onto the post.
True Thai All Stars go down the other end, and after forcing Simon Mignolet into his first save, a cross evades everyone and comes back off the crossbar. Might the home side get something to show from this after all?
Here's a Thai fan dressed up as the Bill Shankly statue before Liverpool's Pre-Season game in Thailand. Bizarre. #LFC pic.twitter.com/Ku6pRQsmc5
GOAL!! 3-0 to Liverpool!! (Lallana) A neat interchange sees Henderson find Lallana inside the area on the left with a cheeky rabona. Despite the torrential rain the England international controls the ball well, shifts it out of his feet and slams a shot across goal and into the net.
Lawro on Joe Allen's pre-season beard: 'I'll never understand that. Why would you grow a beard in the summer?'
The second half kicks off, with Liverpool in a 4-3-3 that looks, on paper, better than the team that played in the first half.
James Milner cited the chance to play in central midfield as a significant factor in his decision to move to Anfield, and he will be in the middle along with Joe Allen and new club captain Jordan Henderson. The only unfamiliar name is Joe Maguire, who is described on the Liverpool website as 'a left-back with a sweet left foot.' We'll be the judge of that, Liverpool.
Oh, and it's absoutely bucketing down now, with many of the 50,000-strong crowd departing the stands in search of cover.
Here's that Liverpool second half team again:
Here's how #LFC will line-up for the second half: Mignolet, Clyne, Skrtel, Lovren, Maguire, Allen, Henderson, Milner, Ibe, Lallana, Origi
The half is drawn to a close with Liverpool two goals to the good and the players looking exactly like you'd expect them to after their first football in over a month and having played it in 30 degree heat. Lawro reckons Liverpool have been very good 'both individually and collectively' and that 'they can be very pleased with themselves'.
There will be a complete overgaul for the second half with James Milner, Nathaniel Clyne and Divock Origi amongst those appearing.
Two assists for the mightily impressive Teixeira. He spent last season on loan at Brighton but maybe he'll get a few more first team chances next term?
GOAL!! 2-0 to Liverpool!! (Sakho) The simplest of goals doubles Liverpool's lead as Mamadou Sakho rises completely unmarked from a Teixeira corner to power a header home.
They really do love Liverpool in Thailand, don't they?
After a well-earned water break stops play temporarily, Liverpool break down the right with Lambert, who finds the head of Jordan Rossiter with an inch-perfect cross. The youngster gets good contact on the header but plants it straight at Warut in the True All Stars goal. Should be a goal but all Liverpool have is a corner, which comes to nothing
Liverpool have a goal disallowed and its Danny Ings who has been denied his first goal in Liverpool colours. A corner falls to Sakho who lunges in to get a shot off, his momentum taking him into the Thai goalkeeper and the ball falling to Ings who smashes it into the roof of the net. The ref has already blown for a very, very soft foul by Sakho, though.
Ings had just been denied by a decent stop by the keeper when he really should have scored.
A first chance for True Thai All Stars from a free-kick 25 yards out. Shot sails harmlessly over Bogdan's goal, though.
Joe Gomez has impressed me so far. Against admittedly poor opposition, yes, but he is quick, strong and looks comfortable in possession.
Danny Ings has run enthusiastically but is yet to make much impact. The other Liverpool new boy, Adam Bogdan, has had absolutely nothing to do.
As I write, Gomez plays a neat one-two down the right to get into a good crossing position but his final ball lets him down. Good signs, nonetheless, from the youngster.
For everyone who thought you'd heard the last of Mark Lawrenson (or equally for those that miss his dulcet tones dearly) he is commentating on this game on LFCTV. True Thai All Stars are 'specialists in ball-watching' according to Lawro. I get what he means, on this occasion.
It does indeed look like Liverpool are playing in a 4-2-3-1 formation with Ings up top. A three of Markovic, Teixeira and Lambert looking rather fluid in behind them, constantly changing positions, though Markovic is predominantly playing through the middle.
GOAL!! 1-0 to Liverpool! (Markovic) Life after Sterling! Lazar Markovic played through on goal by Teixeira, he skips around the goalkeeper with ease and slides the ball home.
We're underway in Bangkok. And this is the starting True All Stars team. Afraid I can't tell you who to look out for.. My apologies.
The players are shaking hands with just a few minutes to kick off now. It is HOT in Bangkok, in case you were wondering. It is 8pm in Thailand but still pushing 30 degrees and over 75 per cent humidity. Welcome to pre-season, lads.
It could also be a 4-2-3-1 with Teixeira and Markovic out wide, and Lambert behind Ings (or vice versa). Whatever the case, there are a hell of a lot of fans there to see it.
A capacity 50-000 crowd is expected, including Super Mario (bottom right)
I would predict that that is a 4-3-3 with Andre Wisdom at left-back and Lazar Markovic and Rickie Lambert playing either side of Ings up front. Youngsters Jordan Rossiter and Joao Teixeira will provide some enegery in midfield ahead of Lucas, who will protect Kolo Toure and Mamadou Sakho.
Here is the second half team you have to look forward to later, by the way.
Confirmed #LFC second-half XI: Mignolet, Clyne, Skrtel, Lovren, Maguire, Allen, Henderson, Milner, Ibe, Lallana, Origi #LFCTour
The teams are out. And by the teams, I mean the Liverpool teams. Yes, they have released two: a first half team and a second half team. This bunch will start the game, with Adam Bogdan, Joe Gomez and Danny Ings making their first appearances in Liverpool colours.
Confirmed #LFC first-half XI in Bangkok: Bogdan, Gomez, Toure, Sakho, Wisdom, Lucas, Rossiter, Teixeira, Markovic, Ings, Lambert #LFCTour
So, here we are! It's the biggest game of Liverpool's season (so far), as they kick off their preparations for the new Premier League campaign by taking on True Thai Premier League All Stars in Bangkok.
We still have three and a half weeks to go until the season starts and another three weeks after that before the transfer window closes. Liverpool have done plenty of business already but I'd expect them to do a little more (both in and out) before the end of August. Still, the players involved today will want to convince manager Brendan Rodgers that no further signings are needed so there will be sufficient motivation to perform today.
If you have any thoughts or questions you can get me at alistairtweedale@telegraph.co.uk or tweet me at @alitweedale
LIVERPOOL vs TRUE THAI PREMIER LEAGUE ALL STARS (2pm kick-off BST)
Liverpool will kick off the first of their five pre-season friendlies against a True Thai Premier League All Stars side in Bangkok.
Liverpool have played four times in the Thai capital since 2001, winning three and drawing one of their matches.
Brendan Rodgers' side are expected to play in front of a 50,000-capacity crowd at the Rajamangala Stadium
The All Stars faced Chelsea in a friendly at the same venue six weeks ago and lost 1-0. Last week they held Championship side Reading to a 2-2 draw.
Five of Liverpool's six summer signings are included in the squad, although Roberto Firmino misses out after he was given more time to recover following his Copa America involvement.
Liverpool hope to impress and move on from the Raheem Sterling saga with the England international expected to complete his £49m move to Manchester City today.
Alistair Tweedale will be here from 1pm to bring you build up and live coverage.