Syracuse, N.Y. — The Syracuse Silver Knights would do almost anything for their loyal group of fans.
Saturday night, however, the indoor soccer team drew the line at selling them the shirts off their backs just yet
The way Syracuse sees it, those jerseys have a little more luck left in them.
And moving forward, the Silver Knights will need all the extra help they can get.
Syracuse beat the Detroit Waza Flo 5-3 in a one-game MASL playoff series in the War Memorial.
After the contest, the team was supposed to auction off its new alternate jerseys to fans. But instead, the players successfully lobbied head coach Tommy Tanner to temporarily hang onto them because they obviously bring good fortune.
So into the next round the charmed threads will go, likely absorbing the players' sweat until the season is over.
"All the guys said, 'Coach, we won in the jerseys. We want to wear them next week,''' Tanner said. "Hopefully, I didn't disappoint any fans and hopefully they'll come out next Sunday. Hopefully we won't sell them next Sunday. Hopefully we'll win that series.''
The Silver Knights will need a lot more than charmed tops to pull that off.
Syracuse's win over the Waza Flo advances it to a quarterfinal series against the powerful Baltimore Blast (15-4), Eastern Division champions and winners of three out of four against Syracuse this season.
The Silver Knights (11-9) will travel to Baltimore for a game on Friday and then host the Blast on March 13. If the series is tied 1-1 after the second game, a 15-minute mini-game will immediately follow to determine who advances.
"Baltimore by far is the most disciplined team in the league,'' Tanner said. "They do the same thing over again. They get five guys behind the ball, very difficult to break down. They pressure you. So we have to get past their pressure.If we get past their pressure, I think we'll be OK.''
The Silver Knights turned that variable back onto visiting Detroit quickly. Jerjer Gibson scored for Syracuse just 2:02 into the game, and after Detroit's Leonardo de Oliveira evened the contest at the 9:53 mark Gibson struck again with 1:59 left in the opening quarter.
Syracuse's Darren Toby and the Waza Flo's Miki Djerisilo traded goals in the second to push the Silver Knights ahead 3-2 at the half, and after a scoreless third the Silver Knights' Doug Miller and Bo Jelovac tallied in the fourth to give the hosts a 5-2 edge that all but ended the drama.
"I think we did a really nice job (defensively). They have a few guys that are extremely talented on the ball,'' said Syracuse goalie Bryan O'Quinn, who made 18 saves. "We were able to get our target forwards in defensively and tuck in and give kind of that extra layer of assistance, which is really, really helpful for us to be able to block their opportunities and force them into passing tunnels that we want them to go, versus them being able to dictate play to us.''
Most MASL first-round series are best-of-three affairs, but building availability issues on Detroit's side turned this one into a one-game winner-take-all.
That could have been more pressure for the Silver Knights, but instead they controlled the moment.
"As I told most of these guys, this is a team, from the outside looking in...that can win a championship,'' Miller said of Syracuse. "The adversity of that (single-game format) determines what kind of character we have as a group. We showed it here. If we're going to win a championship, which I believe this team can, it's going to be discipline and getting behind the ball, and five guys defending.''
And that's a formula that can quickly raise the stock of some well-worn jerseys.
"A shirt's a shirt. It's the player in the shirt,'' Miller said. "But they do look good on the guys. And if this is the shirt we're going to go and beat Baltimore in, it will be that much more priceless. That can raise money for a good charity.''
Saturday's attendance was announced as 1,815.