&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Tom Williams - Mourinho on Costa: "I think again there is a campaign on the television with a certain pundit that is saying Diego Costa crimes."&lt;/noframe&gt;
Declines to say who...
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Dion Fanning - Mourinho asked again to name pundit. 'I don't know his name because when I see him I turn off the television.'&lt;/noframe&gt;
119 mins: Ah! But here is a rare moment on the front foot for Liverpool, Rickie Lambert with a weak shot over though.
118 mins: Here comes Drogba. All Chelsea at the moment.
116 mins: Chelsea come three on three, they've had loads of chances to wrap this up. Hazard delays too long.
115 mins: Liverpool just cannot get on the ball, here's Costa again. Skrtel has no choice but to foul him, and thinks that he might as well make it hurt, and shoulder barges him into the turf, and himself into the book.
113 mins: Hazard dangerous on the break, Can is obliged to foul him, which not only leads to a yellow card but to valuable time eaten up. Costa bundles forward, tank-like, and Chelsea have the ball down by the corner flag.
110 mins: Liverpool are well forward, as you would expect, and I strongly fancy Chelsea for a goal on the counter. Ramires, especially, is getting acres and, although he has again chosen the wrong ball here, it feels like he might get it right sooner or later.
109 mins: Skrtel involved in another dust-up, this time with Coutois. Liverpool piling it on, but YET AGAIN, Balotelli fouls the well, hoofing a cross out by miles.
108 mins: Good move for Liverpool flounders as a result of a terrible touch from Mario. He really can look so, so bad at football when it's not going his way. Intriguing.
107 mins: But it's Chelsea who break though, Ramires galloping clear, and he has a good chance to wrap this up. Poor ball, Liverpool clear.
106 mins: A change for Liverpool as Rickie Lambert comes on in favour of Moreno. Last-chance salooooon for Liverpool, who kick off.
HALF TIME IN EXTRA TIME: CHELSEA 1 LIVERPOOL 0 (2-1 on agg, away goals count at 120 minutes)
104 mins: Willian down the right, fine play, and a foul from Glen Johnson on the byline but the freekick is cleared and that's pretty much the end of that period.
102 mins: Mario does well down the left, crosses, Sterling tries to turn and shoot but the ball is awkward, behind him,
100 mins: Costa involved in his THIRD dirty incident. Does he get to keep the match ball? He and Gerrard clash, tangle, shove, in fairness this is more of a 50-50. Referee Michael Oliver finally uncorks that bottle and it's a yellow for both players.
98 mins: At the other end of the Liverpool utlity spectrum, here is the wonderful Sterling. He's surrounded by Cheslea defenders but zooms forward with a springheeled dart, crossing the ball perectly for Henderson... who misses the target with a header. Should have done better.
96 mins: Liverpool press forward in desperation. Mario, sorry to say, was the man who lost Ivanovic for the goal.
GOAL! Ivanovic! It's a freekick from the right, after Lucas fouls hazard. Should have been a yellow, incidentally. Anyway. Ivanovic leaps, he heads the ball home. Excellent header. Mourinho, behaving like an absolute weapon, storms over to the fourth official to start giving him abuse. Why? Who knows. Maybe he wants Lucas off. Good freekick Willian, but poor marking from Liverpool. Indeed, non-existent. Anyway, the fact is that is that it's CHELSEA 1 LIVERPOOL 0 (Ivanovic 94)
92mins: Countinho, what a brilliant player this kid is, he finds Sterling who does brilliantly to lay it off to Mario. This is it, Mario! Oh he's hit his shot into the top tier. Awful.
91 mins: No time for jibber-jabber...
EXTRA TIME: CHELSEA 0 LIVERPOOL 0 (1-1 on agg, away goals count at the end of 120 minutes for anyone who didn't catch that before, do try to keep up) Well, what a match! This has been quite splendid fun. Costa shoulda been sent off for stamping not once but twice, he should also have had a clear penalty, and there was some brilliant goalkeeping. Jon Garden writes:
Hello, I've never emailed to you before. I enjoy reading your match updates, I've tried to get my wife into them too. Sadly, she's not interested, she would rather watch 24 Hours In Police Custody. However, I am listening to the football on the radio and reading your updates AND I'VE JUST FOUND A STASH OF SWEETS DOWN THE SIDE OF THE SOFA. I'm having so much more fun than her! Keep up the good work.
90+ mins: Chelsea have a corner in what will surely be the last phase of possession, Gerrard excellent tackle, only half clear. And here's Ivanovic, down the left, jinks to the byline, very handy cross in - but no Blue in the six-yard box. That's it! Extra time
90+ mins: No Vwls clears. Chelsea throw down the right. Johnson clears. Neither team tightening up, both going for the winner. It's Costa and Skrtel down by the corner flag, and, appallingly, they don't have a fight. Skrtel even pats him on the back. Nobody likes to see that,
90 mins: As the four minutes of stoppage time begin, it's a corner from Liverpool, cleared.
88 mins: Sterling again, beats Ivanovic, hauled down. Fair one. Yellow card. Gerrard whips it in from the left, a strange sort of cross-shot affair. But Liverpool end up with a corner on the right.
87 mins: Raheem Sterling, cuts inside, beats one but his shot is way over.
86 mins: Liverpool just cannot get out. Willian like an Afro-d tiger.
85 mins: Feels like it's swinging Chelsea's way (cue Liverpool goal) but here they are getting down the left, they've been camped in the Liddypool final third, and here is the tireless Oscar with another cross.
83 mins: Chelsea down the left, cut back for Costa, stabbed shot is easy to clear.
82 mins: Sterling battered to the floor by Ramires.
81 mins: Chelsea fans' joy is unconfined as Coutinho, dribbles past a couple and slips it through to Gerrard... whose shot is right into row z. An airing of The Song.
80 mins: Extra time is, as only extra time can, LOOMING, according to the tellyman. Stephen Glen has a view:
I definitely have to advise the Referee of some good Opticians with regards to those disgusting tackles by Oscar
79 mins: Can blocks off Hazard. Freekick dealt with easily. Felipe Luis is hurt, Cesar Azpilicueta comes on.
77 mins: A momentary lull, in relative terms.
74 mins: Gerrard tries an expansive ball, but Mario is on another page entirely and the ball sails embarrassingly out for a throw. Gerrard gives Mario an old-fashioned look.
73 mins: Terry slides into Sterling from behind, as it were. Booked.
71 mins: Gerrard with a Hollywood shot from distance. Easiest job of the night for the Courtois. Email from Bill Brock, who may or may not have used the word 'toothless' in error but I sadly don't have time to mull it further:
G. Lineker's assessment of Diego Costa is correct: the man is an old-school throwback to the toothless likes of, say, Joe Jordan. Much as I hate seeing him in Chelsea blue, Costa is an impressive specimen. No hothouse flower, he passes the "rainy-day-at-Stoke" test with ease.
Ah. I think he means toothless as in "had his teef knocked out"
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Daniel Taylor - The needle here now extending to Mourinho-Rodgers. Two managers clashing on the touchline after Mourinho signals ref needs glasses&lt;/noframe&gt;
68 mins: Tell you what this match needs: more cowbell. And more MARIO BALOTELLI. He's coming on as a sub. Markovic gives way.
65 mins: Henderson is a lucky boy. A through ball from Chelsea, Henderson quite clearly sticks the arm out, and this should be a second yellow for him. Freekick tame. Email of the day from Alex Lawrie:
Two stamps by Costa. 8 more and he'll get a free coffee
64 mins: Remarkable from Mignolet once again! Oscar with a low ball, and Henderson slides in, deperately. It inadvertantly turns into a perfect through ball, Costa's onto it, and Miggers Mignolet with a superb save using the feet. Brilliant again.
60 mins: Scenes! That is a truly incredible save, one of the best you will ever see.... A shot from Chelsea's Costa, a big deflection off Skrtel, a wonderful late reaction from Mignolet and it's hacked clear.
59 mins: A freekick sees Terry head over, and a good run from Sterling is ended.
58 mins: Oh, Eden Hazard! This is brilliant. He beats one, he beats two, three, four, and he lets rip with a superb strike that flashes just wide. Wonderful player. An email from William Kalua from Malawi, who writes:
Liverpool are playing well and could have been ahead but for the Chelsea keeper. I see this going in to pens. Keep up your good work cause we enjoy your blog tremendously.
Thanks very much William!
55 mins: The notorious hardman Oscar has kicked Henderson.
54 mins: Freekick is an abomination though. Liverpool break, and William absolutely cleans out Sterling. Fairly, but boy that was a hard tackle.
52 mins: Sakho, not for the first time, has done a foolishness. He's played his team into big trouble with a sloppy pass. Oscar latches onto it and Lucas has little choice other than to make the professional foul. And tempers have flared - Skrtel and Costa clash for the ball, and then square up to each other, heads touching, like rutting idiots stags. Costa has stamped on him again!!
50 mins: Fabregas is Fabregoff. Ramires takes his position.
49 mins: Excellent defending from Skrtel, who positions himself brilliantly to cut out a cross. Fabregas looks to have done himself a mischief. Both he and Terry slid it to try to rob Coutinho, the Liverpool man skipped to safety and Terry catches Fabregas high and hard on, I think, the thigh. Terry hasn't hurt a team-mate that badly since the Wayne Bridge incident.
48 mins: Courtinho and Henderson linking up well but a cross is too close to the giant Courtois.
46 mins: Liverpool kick off. Remember (if you haven't heard it 1,000 times before) that there will be extra time if it's level at 90 mins. Away goals only apply after 120 minutes.
HALF TIME: CHELSEA 0 LIVERPOOL 0 (One-all on aggers) Well that was highly enjoyable. Chelsea should have had a penalty when Costa was brought down. But perhaps it was karmic justice, because Costa should equally have been sent off for stamping on Emre Can. That took place right in front of the fourth official, but nothing was done. Other than that, very entertaining match, plenty of action, great pace. An email from Philip Podolsky:
Always wonder how much of Costa's violent provocation is calculated and how much is down to "he likes it a bit too much, gets carried away".
And here's an email from Dan
It's been a proper advert for football so far. While both clubs have their fair share of supporters, there's many more who'd like to see the two sides keep kicking lumps out of each other - including the managers - right through extra time. I wouldn't think this if I wasn't one of the 'many more'.
44 mins: Sakho, idiotic, tries to play the ball out of defence and manages only to get it to Willian on the edge of the area. The Frenchman gets very lucky when Willian fails to pick out Costa with a really simple pass.
42 mins: Coutinho buzzing like a little bee, clever run, gets down the wing, but goes for a shot when team-mates were queuing up for the cut-back. He does, at least, get a corner; nothing comes of it.
40 mins: What a blinding cup tie. All we need is a goal, and a full-on fight. Henderson pursuing Hazard like a man trying to grab hold of a naughty Jack Russell; he has a grab at his shirt, Hazard slips free, another tug and finally he gets him. Ref has had enough and gets the cards out for Hendo.
39 mins: Ivanovic limping after a clash of feet with Coutinho.
38 mins: Oscar again, several Liverpool men around him but he either does not see, or chooses to ignore, the overlapping Ivanovic, who is in space down the right.
37 mins: Oscar himself, Willian and Filipe Luis lining up... it's Oscar who whips it... just wide.
36 mins: Lucas is begging for a yellow card, but he's still not had it. He's fouled Butch Oscar on the edge of the area and Chelsea have a freekick.
33 mins: These two sides going toe-to-toe, Moreno now with a powerful run and now here's Coutinho with a lightning run and cross, John Terry using all of his experience and his Daddies Dad of the Year know-how to close the move down.
29 mins: This is a blinding move, Liverpool's Coutinho surges forward and has a hard low shot, this is again an impressive save from Courtois, using his feet. In fairness the feet in question are about the size of oars, so that must help.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Gary Lineker - Costa is a throwback to an age of beastly centre forwards. Jordan, Burns, et al.&lt;/noframe&gt;
27 mins: Strong run from Matic, but he delays just a fraction of a second too long and Lucas can impede the shot.
26 mins: Should have scored! Brilliant football. Gerrard with a rapier ball, opens Chelsea up, such vision. Moreno's onto it, on the left. He should have shot first time, but he takes a touch and then has a shot - superb save Courtois.
23 mins: But Chelsea go again. Here's the dazzling Hazard, opening Chelsea up down the left. Very hard centre, but a foot behind where Costa needed it... he airshots.
21 mins: Skrtel with a moment of madness, lunging in on Costa, who goes down in the penalty area. NO PENALTY! Wow. That looked a decent shout. Maybe Costa arguably left his leg hanging for a fraction of a second, but no denying the contact. Let-off for Martin.
19 mins: Now Hazard popping up on the other wing, cutting inside, and the ball is smuggled through to will.i.an. Close, but no cigar.
17 mins: Hazard making things happen. Slips it to Ivanovic, and points to where he wants the return. Few inches overhit and goalie gets there.
16 mins: Oscar, good low cross, pings right back out to him. Liverpool clear. And now Liverpool break! Sterling dangerous, Zouma misreads it totally, lets the ball over his head, but uses his strength and pace to make up for it, good tackle in the end. Like a young Rio Ferdinand.
15 mins: Markovic and Matic in a trial of strength for the ball; the Chelsea man wins that by a street.
12 mins: Excellent! A bust up on the touchline, and Mourinho is getting involved. This is what we like to see. Can is on the ground, and here's Costa trying out what might colleague Ben Bloom describes as "the no look stamp."
It appeared absolutely deliberate, and a bust-up ensued. No Vwls Srktl comes over to have a word, as does Lucas. Mourinho giving plenty back.
10 mins: Lucas is keeping the ref busy. Another whistler might have made more of a deal of this very high foot.
7 mins: Frantic, breathless start. Good work from Coutinho, Sterling et al allows Moreno to join the attack from fullback, but sadly his cross does not match the quality of the approach play.
5 mins: Henderson tries to bend a ball into the box, looks like he's overdone it buy Sterling gathers. Comes to nothing, and here are Chelsea on the break. Costa has got too much power for Sakho down the Chelsea right, brushes him aside and cuts the ball in to Willian... it's nicked off him by a lunging Lucas. Handball! no. Michael Oliver says no - he thinks accidental.
3 mins: Busy start, and a very loud atmosphere. Hazard with a darting run.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Telegraph Football - First airing of cruel song about Steven Gerrard that Jose Mourinho asked Chelsea fans not to sing: 00:58 &lt;a href="http://t.co/f862ReOge2" target="_blank"&gt;http://t.co/f862ReOge2&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23CFCvLFC" target="_blank"&gt;#CFCvLFC&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
1 mins: Chelsea kick off, early touch for young Zouma.
19.42 Rather quiet at the Bridge. Here's the Chelsea team.
And that is a seriously strong team. Always feel that Cahill is the weak link.
19.41 The power's back on! TV anchors breathe a huge sigh of relief.
19.40 Players in the tunnel. Gerrard looks focused. Gerrard looks old. The lights are out at Stamford Bridge.
19.30 Mourinho seems pretty no nonsense in his interview. Kurt Zouma plays instead of Gary Cahill and should offer some pace to deal with the electric Raheem Sterling. Jamie Redknapp, though, notes that "Zouma is partial to a mistake." Um.
19.20 Here's how Liverpool line up.
19.15 How are you liking Thierry as a pundit? Seems to me that he's doing a solid job. If he didn't look and sound so purty, would anyone give him a gig? How much should being a Premier League great - which he undeniably is - count? It's nice to have people who played football in living memory, that much you can say.
19.06 Henry: "He is the sort of player who looks others (around him) look good. And that is something that you cannot buy. Well obviously they did buy it, they bought him". Ha. Well saved Thierry,
19.05 Matic being interviewed. Seems like a pleasant lad - very understated. Says that it was while he was on loan at Benfica, under Jorge Jesus, that he was converted from being an attacking midfielder to a defensive.
18.55 I'm sure all you brainy ladies and gents know this already, but I always have to remind myself: away goals count but only after 120 minutes. So If it's level at 90 minutes, we'll have another half hour but a 0-0 would see Chelsea through. An interestingly quirky rule.
18.45 Evening all. Tyers here. How's it going? I have high hopes for this match, have done since the first leg. When Chelsea scored first in that, it felt like it was all over - but Liverpool put it up to them with a really excellent, attacking display, and they got the goal that keeps this tie very much alive.
Clearly, with an away goal, home advantage and the best team in the land, you have to still fancy the Blues, but in a week for cup shocks, a win for Liverpool would be an excellent addition to the genre.
18.44 Here are your line-ups:
Chelsea: Courtois; Ivanovic, Zouma, Terry (c), Filipe Luis; Matic, Fabregas; Willian, Oscar, Hazard; Diego Costa. Subs: Cech, Azpilicueta, Cahill, Ake, Ramires, Remy and Drogba
Liverpool: Mignolet, Can, Skrtel, Sakho, Lucas, Henderson, Moreno, Markovic, Gerrard, Coutinho, Sterling Subs: Ward, Johnson, Lovren, Lambert, Lallana, Allen, Balotelli
17.15 Good afternoon everyone. Alan Tyers will be here from around 6.30pm with all of the pre-match build-up and team news. Do ensure you return and have a read of this preview while you wait.
Preview Liverpool manager Brendan Rodgers is looking forward to locking horns with former mentor Jose Mourinho once again - this time with a Wembley place at stake.
Rodgers takes his Liverpool side to Stamford Bridge for the second leg of their Capital One Cup semi-final on Tuesday night and has high hopes of getting one over the Portuguese.
That was something he failed to achieve last season, most notably as the Reds slipped up at the Londoners' hands in the Premier League run-in in April, suffering a defeat that proved costly to their title chances.
Rodgers, who worked as Mourinho's assistant during his first spell in charge at Chelsea, was also beaten at Anfield in November but last week's 1-1 first-leg draw has offered plenty of hope.
"I always say it is about the teams on the field but knowing him, and how Jose works and how competitive he is, I really enjoy the challenge," said Rodgers, 42, who coincidentally shared a birthday with Mourinho, 10 years his senior, on the eve of the match.
"The game last week was fantastic, it was a top-level game. We were at a really good level.
"Jose's record speaks for itself. He is a world-class manager and will always have that competitive edge. Your teams have to be at the maximum to get a result.
"We respect the opponent but we have got nothing to fear in the game. We are a team that is in a good moment. We are playing well, working well. We know we can go there and win."
Chelsea will on Tuesday night bid to banish the memory of their Bradford beating by reaching Wembley at the expense of Liverpool.
Jose Mourinho will revert to his first-choice players for the match to avoid a cup exit for the second time in four days and reach the March 1 final.
The Blues led Sky Bet League One Bradford 2-0 before losing 4-2 - in a performance branded a "disgrace" by Mourinho - have no time to dwell on the humiliation, but would be eliminated from a second cup competition in four days with defeat to the Reds.
"It's the good thing about playing consecutive matches without many days in between," said Mourinho, who on Monday celebrated his 52nd birthday.
"When you lose, you have to focus immediately on the next game. You don't have a lot of time to be moaning or analysing what happened in the bad one.
"We don't go to Wembley to play the FA Cup final, that's for sure. The FA Cup is finished for us. To go there - and I think that should mean a lot to everyone - the last chance we have is this one, to play there in the Capital One Cup final.
"We are one victory away from playing a final."