Get daily updates directly to your inbox
Labour held on to its dominance on Liverpool city council despite an onslaught from opposition Lib Dem and Green parties.
Liverpool Labour lost two seats, held on to 26 council wards, and won one at the 2016 local election .
Despite a strong vote for the party which saw Joe Anderson easily re-elected , Labour lost the south Liverpool seats of Allerton & Hunts Cross and in Woolton.
The ballot also saw the Green Party hold on to the one seat it was defending in St Michael’s but the party did not make any gains.
Both the Liberal Democrats and the Greens now have four seats, making them the biggest parties after Labour which has 80 of the council’s 90.
The Lib Dems said the wins herald a “resurgence” for the party, and claimed it was a springboard to retake the council by 2020.
It was the first time the Lib Dems made gains in local elections since the party’s collapse in the city after entering a coalition with the Conservatives in 2010.
The election saw a turnout of 31.4%, similar to the turnout in in 2012 when Liverpool last elected a Mayor, but well below last year’s 65.6% when the local election coincided with the General Election.
Full results from Liverpool (article continues below):
Among the winners was Mirna Juarez who won Allerton for the Lib Dems. She said she was pleased to return to the council after a number of years and thanked all those who voted for her.
She had been involved in the green spaces campaigning around the city, particularly Woolton Woods, where the Lib Dems also saw success against Labour.
Lib Dem leader Richard Kemp saw his share of the Mayoral vote treble last night.
He said the party’s success in winning seats heralds a “resurgence” for his party in the city.
Cllr Kemp said the Lib Dems also saw “very strong placings in other wards from which we can build for the future”, and reiterated that his party has a strategy to take it “into control of the council by 2020”.
He said: “I think that is realistic - we know from the votes cast that there are eight wards where we have done well, and we now have to build on that.”
Green Party leader Tom Crone said the party was had held on to their seats and “increased our vote share in St Michael’s ward so we’re satisfied with that.”
Yet despite its losses Labour also appeared largely satisfied with the result after concerns during the campaign about several seats, particularly in south Liverpool.
Paul Brant, who won re-election in Fazakerley in this year’s election, said it had been “a good night” for his party and “good news across the council”.
He said: “We’ve been in power for quite a few years and had to deliver a whole series of very difficult decisions with a 58% reduction in our income from central Government.
“Not withstanding that the people of Liverpool have put their trust back in Labour again.”
Following the declaration of the Mayoral election Mayor Anderson said “to receive this endorsement despite the financial challenges we have had is pretty good”.
And he said: “I’m pleased with the result and I think given that we have had this onslaught from all other parties on issues like green spaces, and the Tory collapse which gave the others a boost, is also pretty good.”