This information comes from the FIT press information from World
Championships 1994 in Oporto/POR, it is, therefore, somewhat dated although
still largely relevant.
No. Like all sports trampolining has a very comprehensive set of
safety regulations. It is recommended that activity should only occur under the
supervision of persons who have obtained a trampolining coaching qualification
and who will know about equipment standards and learning the skills involved. 
Webmaster note - see more about  trampoline safety.
What is required of a competitive trampoline?
Power is required for top level jumping so that height, and therefore time is
available to execute the double, triple and even quadruple somersaults and
twists involved. This necessitates a frame that sets a bed a metre off the
ground and that is approximately 7' (2.14m) by 14' (4.28m). The bed is made of
material (nylon or string) of about 6mm (¼") width.
When, how and where did trampolining originate?
For hundreds of years there have been circus rebound acts. The
modern trampoline was invented by George Nissen, USA in 1936 and spread to
Europe in the late 1940s.  Webmaster note - read more about history.
Having your first go on the trampoline can provide a very strange
experience - you feel as if you have been on a boat in a very stormy sea! Sooner
or later however, you adapt and the up and down experience is very exhilarating.
There are 30 or more different skills a beginner can master without having to do
any up-side-down somersault movements.  Webmaster note - why not find
out first hand at one of our 'taster' sessions?.
Trampolining demands sound technique with the performer being able to call on
courage when learning new moves. The activity at the top level is a power sport,
and only those with good innate special adaptability are likely to master the
complexities and demands of competition.
How long does it take to get to competitive standard?
Some athletes learn very fast and are normally on the national open circuit
within a year of beginning the sport. At youth international level most athletes
will have 3-5 years experience in the sport, and at senior level 4-7 years.
As with most modern competitive athletes, trampolinists have full training
programmes, with some having 1 or 2 training sessions of 1-3 hours duration 5-6
days each week. Others may have less training days each week.
What is the best age for trampolining?
The dynamic demands of the sport make it one for young people, and whilst
people in their twenties have taken up the sport and achieved a good standard,
the majority of stars are likely to have commenced their trampolining career in
their pre-teenage years. The human body appears to be particularly receptive of
the learning demands from the ages of 9-14 years, with the associated power
demands coming into play from the age of about 12-14 years.
How high does a performer jump?
International rules require that the minimum height of the ceiling in the
competition hall be 8m (26' 3") and athletes have been known to touch 9.14m
(30') ceiling with their finger tips! 5m is adequate for beginners.
International athletes get high enough to spend nearly 2 seconds in the air, so
a routine of 10 skills lasts approximately 20 seconds.
No. The International Trampoline Federation (FIT) is, however, one of those
IFs recognised by the International Olympic Committee. It should also be
remembered that there are many more sports outside the Olympics than in! 
Webmaster correction - it was first in the Sydney Olympics in 2000 and now has a
regular spot.  As at 2006, it still hasn't made it to the Commonwealth
Games though.
The FIT was formed in 1964. There is an elected Executive of 10 members and a
Technical Committee of 7 members, forming the Board, and who run the
international side of the sport. There are also various Commissions with their
own remits. A Congress is held every two years, in conjunction with the World
Championships, with elections every four years. Each of the 42 member
federations of the FIT can send representatives to the Congress and each have
voting power.
What is the world competitive structure?
Since the 1st World Championships in 1964 there has been a continuous
development towards a more comprehensive world-wide structure of competition:
A number of countries also hold international invitational events that
attract entries from many members federations.
What events are included in a trampoline competition?
There are individual events for men and women. Out of the results of either
the first two rounds of competition, a team result is arrived at, for both men
and women. A team consists of 3/4 members. There are also competitions for pairs
(synchronised trampoline), tumbling and double-mini trampoline (DMT).
What is involved for a competitor at a competition?
All competitors perform two routines. The top 10 athletes with the highest
score, which determines the start order, then proceed to the final where they
perform a further optional routine, starting with a zero score. The athlete with
the highest score at this stage is the winner. The winner is the competitor,
pair with the highest score in the final. The winner of the team competition is
the team with the highest overall points.  Webmaster correction - this
is largely correct although rules governing finals can vary depending on the
competition in particular as regards numbers and scores reset.
5 judges mark a routine for style. They take into consideration whether the
routine has good form (tidy with straight legs and arms, head controlled, body
straight, ...), is kept in the middle of the bed and is off a consistent height.
Additionally, with voluntary routines, difficulty (tariff) is assessed and this
is added to the mark for style (form). Style has 3 times the weighting of
difficulty - it used to be 1:1 a number of years ago, so the sport is very much
more an aesthetic one, and safer too.
The amount of movement a performer makes, whether somersaulting or twisting,
decides on the rating (tariff) of a move, i.e.
Therefore, a double (tucked) somersault with 1/2 twist gets 0.9. At
the somersault level, piked and straight moves receive a 0.1 bonus for each
somersault, compared with tucked somersaults. E.g. a double somersault, piked,
with 1/2 twist would get 1.1. Webmaster correction - not entirely true now,
see our page on competition organisation.
How does double-mini trampoline and tumbling feature?
The disciplines of double-mini trampoline and tumbling have featured in the
World Championship schedule since 1976. The number or participating nations is
slowly growing in these disciplines, but we would like to see a greater interest
shown in these sports by our members.
What is involved with tumbling and double-mini
trampoline?
Tumbling - athletes perform two voluntary passes (each of 8 elements)
along a 26m sprung surface track, which must be padded. The top ten athletes
after the preliminaries proceed to the final where they perform an additional
voluntary routine, consisting of 8 elements. Passes should show good control,
form, execution and maintenance of tempo. The winner is the competitor with the
highest score in the final.
Competition consists of both individual and team events. The winner of the
team competitions is the team with highest overall points.
Double-Mini - athletes perform three passes (preliminaries) with a
maximum of 2 skills in each pass, and a further two passes in the final on the
2.85m x .72m bed. A pass includes a run up, mounting the bed, doing a maximum of
two moves (but including up to 3 contacts) dismounting the bed onto a soft
landing area. The top 10 after the preliminaries proceed to the final. The
winner is the competitor with the highest score in the final.
Competition consists of both individual and team events. The winner of the
team competition is the team with the highest overall points.