Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play.
Norwich skipper Grant Holt scored a hat-trick as the Canaries deepened the problems of East Anglia rivals Ipswich with a convincing victory in a fiery encounter at Carrow Road.
Ipswich have numerous players out injured but they have nonetheless now lost four straight league games as their bright start to the campaign slowly becomes a distant memory, increasing the pressure on manager Roy Keane.
But the result lifted Paul Lambert's Norwich up to fifth in the Championship table after a deserved victory against a side that were awful in defence for most of the contest.
Holt's first two goals came after he dispossessed an opposition defender, while Damien Delaney saw red in the first half for a professional foul after he too had been caught on the ball and subsequently brought down the Norwich striker as he tried to atone for his error.
Prior to his dismissal, Delaney had scored Ipswich's equaliser with a far-post header during an action-packed opening half that saw Norwich lead 2-1 at the break.
It was a lot tighter after the restart but two goals in as many minutes put the result beyond doubt as Holt slotted home from 14 yards before substitute Wes Hoolahan craftily lifted the ball over Marton Fulop.
Derby matches are often tense and cagey encounters but this game exploded into life as early as the second minute when Holt crudely hacked Jack Colbeck to the floor.
Holt was arguably fortunate to escape with a yellow card, while Grant Leadbitter was also booked after man-handling the Norwich striker as he lay on the ground.
Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play.
A melee of sorts followed as the atmosphere inside a packed Carrow Road turned red-hot, in stark contrast to the freezing temperatures around the ground.
The home crowd were incensed shortly afterwards when referee Keith Hill did not award their team a penalty when Ipswich defender Gianni Zuiverloon, making his debut after signing on loan from Hull, appeared to foul Andrew Surman inside the area.
But they were sent into raptures when Holt put the Canaries ahead after catching Darren O'Dea in possession before superbly finishing with a strike across goal after eight minutes. There was a suspicion of a handball by Holt as he gained possession but that went unnoticed by the referee.
Norwich seemed to be able to pick holes in the Ipswich defence every time they attacked and Henri Lansbury fired over from the edge of the box before Andrew Crofts shot weakly at goal from six yards as they threatened to score a second.
But for all that Ipswich were poor at the back, they did play some enterprising attacking football, with striker Tamas Priskin particularly effective.
He forced John Ruddy into action after a surging run into the box and later knocked Leadbitter's raking free-kick back across goal for Delaney to equalise with a close-range header.
The game appeared to be back in the balance but the increasingly influential Lansbury, who signed on loan this week from Arsenal, unlocked the Ipswich defence with a brilliant through-ball that Holt collected before shooting beyond Fulop from 16 yards.
And the game turned decisively after 37 minutes when Delaney, in another act of suicidal defending, was caught in possession by Holt. The striker advanced towards goal but was brought down by Delaney, who was correctly sent from the field.
Holt failed to convert a cross from Russell Martin and Fulop athletically saved a header from Surnman as Ipswich somehow reached the break without conceding again.
Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play.
The Tractor Boys regrouped at the break and they looked a lot more solid in the second half, although Chris Martin was gifted the space to shoot from 20 yards while Holt had a weak header saved and another that missed the target as Norwich looked most likely to score the game's next goal.
And Holt, who received a generous round of applause when he was substituted in the final few minutes, put the result beyond doubt when he tucked home a lay-off from Chris Martin.
A raking pass from the left was then flicked on by Holt and Chris Martin into the path of Hoolahan, who ensured it would be an afternoon to remember for the home fans with a delayed finished, chipping the ball over Fulop to seal Norwich's most emphatic win over their rivals.
Live text and data provided by The Press Association.