The purpose of the UGAGB is to provide both competitive and social golfing opportunities to the broad Ukrainian community of Great  Britain  and is open to both men and women golfers, those who play and those who would like to play.
The winner of the 2016 Order of Merit is
The race for this years Order of Merit trophy saw 5 members vying for the society's prestigious trophy.
Before the seasons's final event at Rushcliffe Golf Club, Graham had started the day in 4th postion in OOM, 3 points behind the leader, but with the standings based on a members cummulative points from the best 5 rounds throughout the season, a members standing could be improved if the score in the final event bettered the lowest recorded score from previous events.
Graham began the season with a handicap of 24 and in the season's first event, The President's Trophy, having blown off the cobwebs and cleaned his clubs following their winter hibernation, he scored 29 points, his lowest score in the 6 of 7 events he played during the season and his handicap went up to 25.
The season's next event, the UGAGB Challenge, Graham had an excellent round, tied at 37 points for the lead, which he won on count-back and so began a run of consistent rounds of golf playing off a lower handicap of 23.
In the next 3 events he scored 32, 30 and 34 and his handicap increased to 24 as the UGAGB handicap rules dictate, therefore, coming into the final event, a score of 30 or more would enhance his OOM standing.
Having scored 21 on the front 9, he maintined his focus and concentration on the back 9 and finished with a round of 37, which on the day saw him win his divisional flight and overall runner up, 1 point behind the winner.
However, with a score of 37, his final OOM standing increased by 8 points to 170, 3 points ahead of the runner up and in doing so, won the coveted OOM trophy and finished the season with a handicap of 21 to take into 2017 when he will be representing UGAGB in the UGWC in Scotland.
What is remarkable about Graham's achievement this season is that he is not a regular golfer and does not play golf outside the UGAGB events as some of the members do and so he has definitely proved to be a worthy winner of the Order of Merit 2016.
Well done Graham and congratulations from all the members of UGAGB.
If you are interested in becoming a member please click the link below and we will gladly send you all the details.