Regardless of their troubled 2011-2012 season, Nottingham Forest are without a doubt one of England's most famous, well supported and historic clubs with a story of highs and lows unlike no other football club since their conception in 1865. The club originally known as Nottingham Forest Football and Bandy Club came from small origins but the passion of coaches such as Brian Clough and players such as Trevor Francis has meant that their popularity continues till this day even though it's almost three decades since winning trophies were a regular occurrence at the club. For fans of Nottm Forest, we'll be on hand each week for your live streaming needs, with links listed for hundreds of Npower Championship games this season! Follow this week's action with our free coverage below for the Ipswich vs Forest stream as we all look on to see if Nottingham Forest can pull their way back up the Championship table.
Our Next Live Stream: Ipswich vs Forest, latest links posted on 
09-11-16        .
Very few Nottingham Forest live matches are broadcast on UK TV, with the occasional match aired over Sky Sports or BBC. For fans outside the UK, some Forest games are available via Al Jazeera Sports, but again, the majority of supporters are turning to the net to follow Nottingham on their pc or mac each week. Bet365 are without a doubt, our favourite site for watching Forest online, each week, providing free high quality live streams including this week's Ipswich vs Forest match. Fans in the UK and abroad can tune in to the live video and watch the full 90 minutes in addition to excellent English commentary. If any other p2p or webstream videos are available, such as Sopcast, Veetle, TVU or flash streaming for pc, mac and iPad devices, - we will list it below so you can watch the next Forest game online!
A brief history of Nottingham Forest FC:
Most notable of all their achievements is surely the two European Cup victories back to back in the 79/80 seasons. Forest went one better in these two seasons by also winning the UEFA Super Cup which was a fantastic addition to at trophy cabinet which now includes 2 FA Cup victories, 4 league cup victories and a one time win of the old first division title. With such an illustrious history, it is still worth noting that Forest are without a major cup win since 1990, however they did win the 2nd division title in 1998 and were 3rd division runners up in 2008.
How to watch Nottingham Forest online:
It's completely up to you whether you choose the reliable official free streaming links or any p2p links (when available). However, we advise that when watching via p2p and webstreaming services such as those available on wiziwig, atdhe, footy forums and other free streaming portals, these live videos can be taken offline at any time and often feature foreign commentary from European satellite providers. With our free streams listed above, you can watch and listen to Ipswich vs Forest live online this week and enjoy the game in full screen with coverage compatible with ipad, mac, laptop and mobile devices in addition to pc's. Enjoy this week's Forest game! * Regional restricions apply, check full schedules for more info. nPower games not available for UK users.
Thanks to  Jim Daun's Nottingham Forest live blog for the latest info on streams, match previews and more.
© LiveFootballStreams.co.uk - Watch Nottingham Forest Live Online