Mandy Martin was the winner of the National Horse Show 'Good Hands' Saddle Seat Equitation Championship at last year's Pennsylvania National Horse Show
American Saddlebreds have been an integral part of the Pennsylvania National Horse Show for most if not all of its 60 years. The greats of Saddlebred history, including Wing Commander, have competed before crowds counted in the thousands. The show hosts this year, for the fifth time, the National Horse Show ‘Good Hands’ Saddle Seat Equitation Championship.
The PNHS is the nation’s largest multi-breed indoor horse show, awarding 11 national championships and drawing top horses and riders from across North America. It has an extremely high profile on the national equestrian scene. With roughly 4,000 participants (exhibitors, trainers and support) and 30,000 spectators, it is a remarkable showcase for the breed.
The 2006 show, held October 12-21 at the recently expanded Farm Show Arena in Harrisburg, PA, will feature a complete slate of Saddlebred divisions, which were totally revamped and updated last year. A Saddlebred Advisory Committee recommended the changes, which were adopted by PNHS management.
Among those recommendations was the establishment of the ASHA Northeastern Regional Championships, which were held for the first time ever at the PNHS last year. The Championships, sanctioned by the ASHA, will be awarded to the highest placed horse that is stabled in or owned by a resident of Zone 11 or 12 (Virginia through Maine). Championships will be awarded in the following stake classes:
Amateur, Open and Jr. Exhibitor Three Gaited
Adult and Jr. Exhibitor Show Pleasure
Adult and Jr. Exhibitor English Country Pleasure
Winners will be awarded a championship neck ribbon and a victory pass.
The PNHS also added an additional saddle seat equitation championship to complement the Good Hands. The Pennsylvania National Horse Show Equitation Challenge, open to all saddle seat equitation riders except those who make the final Good Hands cut, will be held Friday night, October 20, one of the highest attendance nights of the show.
The show is held at the recently renovated Farm Show Complex in Harrisburg, PA. All classes are held in the 7,700 seat coliseum and the complex features 26 acres of stabling, warm up, arenas, vendors and seating under one roof. World class dining, attractions and shopping are located in the Harrisburg area, which also offers 8,500 hotel rooms and easy highway access from all points. Prize lists are available on the website, www.panational.org, or by calling (717) 770-0222. Entries close September 6.