Defending champion Serena Williams got her 2016 Wimbledon campaign off to a winning start on Tuesday in the women's draw as she beat Switzerland's Amra Sadikovic, 6-2, 6-4, on Centre Court.
World No. 2 Andy Murray also eased through in straight sets in his first round as he beat fellow Brit Liam Broady, 6-2, 6-3, 6-4, to get his campaign for a second Wimbledon title off to the perfect start.
Other notable winners on the second day of action in SW19 were fourth seed Stan Wawrinka, Australia's Nick Kyrgios and returning Argentinian Juan Martin del Potro, as evening rain caused many matches to be suspended.
Here are all the scores from an eventful day at the All England Club, along with a closer look at how some of the top players got on:
Murray has made it to the final of both Grand Slams so far this year but has been beaten at the Australian and French Opens by Novak Djokovic.
He will look to go one better at Wimbledon and add another gong to his two Grand Slam titles, and he showed fine touch in his opening match.
In all three sets, he broke early to take the initiative, and his serve was brilliant for the majority of the 102-minute match, Broady earning just two break points in the whole encounter—neither of which he could take.
The 22-year-old improved as the match went on, but he could not live with Murray in the end as the Scot cruised through to the second round, per ESPN Tennis:
In the all-British battle it's World No.2 Murray who eases past Broady 6-2 6-3 6-4, scoring 96th match-win on grass. pic.twitter.com/nJqlq9IzAT
Wawrinka was not so comfortable in his match but eventually came through against 18-year-old American Taylor Fritz in two hours and 23 minutes.
The youngster claimed the third set on a tie-break against the fourth seed but eventually was overwhelmed by Wawrinka's superior quality and consistency.
However, the Swiss player had some positive words for Fritz after the clash, per the BBC (via the New York Times' Christopher Clarey):
Wawrinka to the BBC on 18-year-old American Taylor Fritz pic.twitter.com/mOBb39NOlm
One of the most entertaining games of the day was Kyrgios' four-set win over 37-year-old Radek Stepanek, the Czech Republic player winning the third set after a monster tie-break that went to 11-9.
Kyrgios eventually came through with relative ease, pulling off a few sublime shots on the way to the second round, where he will face another entertainer in the shape of Dustin Brown, per Wimbledon:
All in a day's work for @NickKyrgios...#Wimbledon https://t.co/cTOyotcRHa
Meanwhile, Del Potro returned to Grand Slam action after an absence of 894 days and produced a fine straight-sets win over veteran Stephane Robert, per Wimbledon.
Only the second set was in any way competitive as the 2009 U.S. Open champion came through, 6-1, 7-5, 6-0, and he will now face Wawrinka in the next round.
It was not a vintage display from Williams to get her tournament up and running, but she did enough to see off Sadikovic, the world No. 148, in just 73 minutes.
The legendary American served only four aces in the match, while also producing five double faults, two more than her opponent, per Wimbledon.
Crucially, in the opening set, Serena claimed two breaks of serve while saving all five opportunities Sadikovic had to get her own break.
And even though the Swiss player did get a break in the second set, Williams claimed two of her own to see out the match.
Per BBC Tennis, Williams is still one Grand Slam title away from joining Steffi Graf on 22 after losing in both major finals in 2016 so far:
The life of a legend.
The life of Serena Williams #Wimbledon https://t.co/Bm35qTeFjl
She will have to be better than she was on Tuesday if she is finally to emulate the great German at Wimbledon this year, but she has plenty of time to find her groove before the business end of the tournament.
Two-time Grand Slam champion Svetlana Kuznetsova also booked her place in the second round on Tuesday as she beat former world No. 1 Caroline Wozniacki, 7-5, 6-4.
The opening set was very tight and looked to be heading for a tie-break before Kuznetsova went up a gear at exactly the right time, claiming a break for 6-5 and serving out the set.
She then rushed into a 4-0 lead in the second, her groundstrokes causing Wozniacki all kinds of problems, only for the Dane to put together her own run and get back to 5-4.
Eventually Kuznetsova was clinical in serving out the set, and she will now face Great Britain's Tara Moore in the second round.
The 23-year-old Moore, world No. 227, pulled off something of an upset on Court 8 as she beat Alison Van Uytvanck, 6-3, 6-2, for her first-ever Grand Slam win, per Team GB:
Boom! 🇬🇧 wildcard @TaraMoore92 with her first ever grand slam win 6-3 6-2, just before the 💦 too! #Wimbledon pic.twitter.com/4vvrzly9I9
Meanwhile, Italian sixth seed and 2015 U.S. Open finalist Roberta Vinci got past America's Alison Riske in three sets to set up a second-round match with China's Ying-Ying Duan.