Aston Villa live score (and video online live stream*), team roster with season schedule and results.'
Aston Villa is playing next match on 18. Nov 2016 against Brighton & Hove Albion in Championship.
When the match starts, you will be able to follow
Aston Villa v Brighton & Hove Albion live score
standings, minute by minute updated live results and match statistics. We may have video highlights with goals and
news for some Aston Villa matches, but only if they play their match in one of the most popular football leagues.
Aston Villa previous match was against Blackburn Rovers in Championship, match ended with result 2 - 1
(Aston Villa won the match).
Aston Villa fixtures tab is showing last 100 football matches with statistics and
win/draw/lose icons. There are also all Aston Villa scheduled matches that they are going to play in the future.
Aston Villa performance & form graph is SofaScore
Football livescore
unique algorithm that we are generating from team’s last 10 matches, statistics, detailed analysis and our own
knowledge. This graph may help you to bet on Aston Villa matches, but be aware of that SofaScore LiveScore accepts
no responsibility or liability for any financial or other loss, be it direct or indirect, as a result of any
action reliant on any of this website’s content.
In match details we offer link to watch online
Aston Villa Brighton & Hove Albion live stream
sponsored by bet365. If this match is covered by bet365 live streaming you can watch Aston Villa Brighton & Hove Albion
on your PC and on mobile - iPhone, iPad, Android or Windows phone.
Please note that
the intellectual property rights to stream such events are usually owned at a country level and therefore,
depending on your location, there may be certain events that you may be unable to view due to such restrictions.
Current Aston Villa squad is:
Forwards: Gabriel Agbonlahor, Rudy Gestede, Libor Kozak, Jordan Pierre Ayew, Rushian Hepburn-Murphy, Ross McCormack, Jonathan Kodjia
Midfilders: Ashley Westwood, Leandro Bacuna, Jack Grealish, Andre Green, Jordan Lyden, Gary Gardner, Aaron Tshibola, Mile Jedinak, Albert Adomah
Defenders: Alan Hutton, Aly Cissokho, Micah Richards, Jordan Amavi, Nathan Baker, Tommy Elphick, James Chester, Ritchie De Laet
Goalkeepers: Mark Bunn, Jed Steer, Pierluigi Gollini
You can click on any player from the roster on the right and see his personal information such as nationality,
date of birth, height, preferred foot, position, player value, transfer history etc. There are also statistics
for each player in all competitions with all total played and started matches, minutes played, number of goals
scored, number of cards and much more. Aston Villa top scorers list is updated live during every match.
SofaScore
football livescore
is available as iPhone and iPad app, Android app on Google Play and Windows phone app.
You can find us in all stores on different languages searching for "SofaScore". Install SofaScore app and
follow all Aston Villa matches live on your mobile!