Chicago Mustangs 15-4 Detroit Waza Flo
HOFFMAN ESTATES, IL–For the Chicago Mustangs today’s 15-4 win over the Detroit Waza Pro was like old times of last season. The Mustangs went undefeated and led the PASL in scoring on route to winning the League Championship and the Open Cup.
“The players came out focused today,” said Mustangs Head Coach Armando Gamboa. “Our fans needed that. I think some of our fans were starting to doubt us. Today was our style of play with a lot of ones and ones.”
The Mustangs came out strong and scored four goals in the first ten minutes. Victor Sanchez opened the scoring with a goal at the 4:10 mark. That was followed by goal from Miguel Vaca and two goals from Bryan Moya. Detroit would dent the net when Worteh Sampson scored a power play goal at 11:01.
Moya added another goal before the period was over. He would end the day with four goals and two assists. The Mustangs kept the pressure up for the entire game. They pressed to get turnovers and counter attacked in numbers. They put up eight goals in the first half and seven goals in the second.
On the defensive side, Goalkeeper Jesus Flores made seventeen saves and Joshio Sandoval was named defensive player of the game with three blocked shots. Detroit’s Miki Djerisilo was named third star of the game. Djerisilo assisted on three of the four Detroit goals.
Both teams had player red-carded in the match. Detroit’s Darrel Quinn saw red for spitting at Guilherme Veiga in the 2nd quarter and Victor Sanchez saw red for the Mustangs after a retaliatory elbow at former Storm player Costea Decu in the third.
The Mustangs will hit the road to Detroit on December 20th. The game will kick off at 6pm at the Melvindale Arena.
(4th) CHI-Efrain Wilo Martinez (shootout)(PPG) 4:59
(1st) CHI-Efrain Wilo Martinez (blue, slide tackling) 8:38
(1st) CHI-bench (blue, too many men) 10:27
(1st) DET-Darrel Quinn (blue, elbowing) 13:27
(1st) DET-Darrel Quinn (yellow, misconduct) 13:27
(2nd) DET-Nik Djokic (blue, tripping) 10:08
(2nd) DET-Darrel Quinn (red, spitting) 13:09
(3rd) CHI-Victor Sanchez (red, violent conduct) 6:07
(3rd) DET-Costea Decu (blue, elbowing) 6:07
(3rd) DET-Salvatore Fiore (blue, holding) 7:32
(4th) DET-Costea Decu (blue, holding) 4:55
(4th) CHI-Efrain Wilo Martinez (blue, 4th foul of half) 8:34
SHOTS ON GOAL:  CHI 39-21 DET
POWER PLAYS:  CHI 5-6; DET 2-2
Man of the Match:  Bryan Moya (CHI)