Howe Farm, designed by IPT Architects, has been judged to be the Supreme Winner of the 2016 Surface Design Awards.
Howe Farm, designed for a private client and located in Buckinghamshire, is a subtle and unassuming dwelling.  It is a practical farmhouse with low visual impact and is in keeping with its surroundings.  The exterior explores the use of simple black stained larch cladding panels in various configurations.  This clever arrangement allows the surface of the building to vary from solidity to transparency and in-turn creates ever changing shadows.
The judges praised the accomplished use of material that enhanced the building in its setting, describing the treatment of the roof as artful and with a number of judges proclaiming ‘I want to live there’.
The Surface Design Awards recognise examples of progressive design and the use of innovative surfaces in projects both in the UK and internationally. 32 projects were named as finalists for the 2016 awards with 40% of shortlisted projects being from outside the UK covering an extensive 12 countries.
Each project was judged on a range of criteria including the type of surface, the use of materials and aesthetic design. 13 winners were announced from seven different categories (see list, right).
With project admissions including private houses, hospitals, restaurants, and even a sewage works, the judging panel had a difficult task in selecting the finalists and winners of each category.
The range of exciting and creative projects inspired an animated debate on the virtues of each project from the panel with projects described as ‘stand out’, ‘modern’, ‘unusual’ and ‘strong’.
The judging panel was co-chaired by Sarah Featherstone of Featherstone Young and Theresa Dowling of FX Magazine.  The other judges were Andrew Waugh of Waugh Thistleton Architects; Anna Breheny of Scott Brownrigg Interior Design; Chris Jenkins of Peldon Rose; Diana Cochrane of Kent School of Architecture; Michaela Matheson of BDG Architecture + Design; Xavier Llarch Font of The Decorators and Sharon Stammers and Martin Lupton of Light Collective.
Supreme Winner: Howe Farm
Architect/Designer: IPT Architects
Contractor: Ecospace
Commercial Exterior Surface: Crossness Cake Building
Architect/Designer: Lyall, Bills & Young Architects
Contractor: Tamesis
Commercial Interior Surface: Le Lido
Architect/Designer: Giles Miller Studio
Contractor: Interior Designer Beatrice Coulboy for Opus Certum
Housing Exterior Surface: Howe Farm
Architect/Designer: IPT Architects
Contractor: Ecospace
Housing Interior Surface: Villa Las Brisas
Architect/Designer: Sergey Mishin & Katya Larina
Contractor: Gezdan
Light & Surface Exterior: Summer House in Halkidiki Greece
Architect/Designer: Eva Sopeoglou
Contractor: METALSO Elias Sopeoglou
Light & Surface Interior: Puzzle Me!
Architect/Designer: Margherita Palli & Marco Cristini
Contractor: Sailmaker International
Public Building Exterior Surface: Channing School
Architect/Designer: BuckleyGrayYeoman
Contractor: Barley McNaughton
Public Building Interior Surface: Winchester School of Art
Architect/Designer: Berman Guedes Stretton
Contractor: Spetisbury
Retail Exterior Surface: 24 Savile Row
Architect/Designer: EPR Architects
Contractor: McLaren Construction
Retail Interior Surface: Loco Restaurant
Architect/Designer: João Tiago Aguiar, Arquitectos
Contractor: Oficina Dos Sonhos
Sustainable Exterior Surface: Kebony, Camber Sands
Architect/Designer: Walker & Martin Architects
Sustainable Interior Surface: Yu Geng Shan Private Wine Cellar
Architect/Designer: Godolphin
Contractor: Ming Kun
Temporary Structure: UAE Pavillion, Milan Expo 2015
Architect/Designer: Foster + Partners
Contractor: A&A Company