Canada, led by Coach Dominic Scicluna, took the win in their first matchup in the 2015 WMF Arena World Cup Group C action when they beat Serbia 10-6 at the Taylor Sportsplex in Taylor, Michigan.
Scicluna found himself in a first ever owner/coach/player trade in the middle of the Major Arena Soccer League (MASL) this year when he was traded to Las Vegas Legends from the Detroit Waza Flo.  His homecoming back to Detroit last night was a warm one coming off a playoff run attempt with the Legends to now leading Team Canada to a win in their first game of the 2015 World Cup.
Despite Scicluna’s team being outshot by Serbia 33-29, Canada’s shots were decisively more on target.
The first goal of the night would be tallied by the MASL’s Milwaukee Wave Midfielder Ian Bennett in the first minute and a half of play.  Minutes later, Canada would find the net again when #11 Jocelyn Roy, a Forward who plays with Montre, scored the 2nd goal for his national team.
Leading the way for Serbia’s attempt to stay in the game, was #7 Alexsov Sloboda, who had a hat-trick with goals in 1st, 2nd, and 4th quarters.  His first goal came immediately after Roy’s goal with 6 minutes remaining in the 1st quarter.
Roy would counter with another goal for Canada with just over a minute left in 1st quarter action to extend the lead to 2-1.  Right before the quarter ended, Serbia was called with on a hand ball and Canada would score their 3rd of the night when #99 Freddy Moojen, a Forward with the MASL Dallas Sidekicks, scored off a successful penalty kick past the diving Serbian goalie extending the lead  4-1 for  his team.
The 2nd quarter would begin as the 1st quarter ended with Moojen adding to Canada’s lead with 6 minutes remaining in the half.  Aleksov would score his second of three in the night just minutes after Canada’s goal.  Serbia continued their offensive attack with attempt on goal when a shot was taken by #4 Joe Di Buono that skimmed across the top crossbar and almost slid into the net.  The half would end with Canada leading 5-2 in the Group C World Cup game.
The solid crowd was treated to non-stop action when they witnessed the halftime game by two local colleges, Marygrove and Lawrence Tech University.  The pressure was on for both teams throughout the matchup but Marygrove would take the 6-0 win and shutout.
World Cup second half action brought many attempts by both teams who were continually denied by the goalies as well as defenders quick to block.  Canada would be the first to break the seal in the half in the 8th minute when #77 Lucas Ferritto scored and with great excitement kissed the crest on his jersey while running across the pitch in celebration alongside #8 Jeff Hodgson who assisted.
Serbia answered back with just minutes left in the 3rd quarter with a goal by #20 Milos Scepanovic, assisted by Captain/Coach #10 Miki Djerisilo who then turned around and scored one of his own with just over a minute left to extend Serbia’s rally to close in within 2 goals of Canada.  The quarter would end with Canada leading 6-4 against Serbia.
The fourth and final quarter had a barrage of goals between the two teams.  After rifling towards the Serbian net two times in a row with great goalie reflexes by Serbia, the third attempt and rebound would penetrate when #6 David Kadoic’s shot went in.  Kadoic would find the net again when he was assisted by #10 Oliver Babineau to extend Canada’s lead to 8-4 with only six minutes left in action.
A handball foul called on Canada would provide Serbia with their next goal when the PK taken by #8 Milan Ivanovic sailed past the Canadian goaltender and brought a sense of possibility back into Serbian’s team.  This would be short lived however when #20 Pascal Aoun for Canada attacked the Serbian’s net for yet another goal for Canada to now lead 9-5 with four minutes left in play.
Aoun was not done as he struck goal one more time just a minute later taking Canada’s lead further.  Despite an aggressive attempt with many shots by Serbia, including from their goalie, they only got through one last time with just over a minute left in play as Aleksov scored his hat trick on the night with an assist by his captain/coach Djerisilo.  This last goal would end the scoring for the night with 10-6 being the final score on Canada’s win.
Both teams will be in action again tonight, this time in Flint, Michigan at the Perani Arena.
Team Russia, who lost last night 9-4 to Brazil, will face off against Serbia at 6pm.  The second game will be at 7:30pm when the top two teams in Group C, with a 1-0 record for each, Brazil and Canada will matchup to cap off the World Cup excitement for the night.
Legendary Indoor Soccer player, Tatu, will be in attendance as he leads team Brazil as head coach.  Tatu, born Antonio Carlos Pecorari and is a Brazlian Forward that played and coached in the Major Indoor Soccer League from the 1980s to present with the Tampa Bay Rowdies, Wichita Wings and Dallas Sidekicks. He is the only person to win in the same season the player of the year and coach of the year awards in 1998 and is considered to be one of the best players to have played indoor soccer in the U.S.
Tickets for the 2015 Areana WMF World Cup action are good for both games in each night and can be purchased at the door or online at http://m.ticketmaster.com/event/08004E59FE2959A7? Prices are $15 Reserved (Group of 10 or more $13) $10 General Admission (Group of 10 or more $8).
Thursday night’s Quarterfinal Game can be Free Admission if tickets are purchased for Tuesday and Wednesday night games.
Games throughout the week can also be found on ESPN3.  Live tweeting can be found through @KellyHaapala and @Soccer4Mi
Photo credit to Troy Johnson with Covenant Digital Photography.