Louisville, Kentucky: Muhammad Ali spent the better part of a decade planning his funeral, his friends and family said, and by late Friday afternoon it was evident what had taken him so long. In a spectacle that fanned across miles of his hometown, in memories that stretched over some of the most turbulent years of 20th century US history, and in the prayers of faiths that he embraced and honoured as paths to truth, he was laid to rest, one week after his death at age 74.
Ali was eulogised in a grand sports arena by, among others, a priest and an imam, a rabbi and a monk, a former US president and a famous comedian. A proteges, his daughters and his wife remembered him. As they spoke, all stood beneath the flags of the United States and the Olympics, symbols of a man who saw himself as a citizen of the United States and of the world.
Earlier in the day, his coffin travelled through nearly 20 miles of Louisville, Kentucky, cheered and saluted by tens of thousands of people who tossed flowers onto the hearse and chanted his name.
On Thursday, a traditional Muslim ceremony was held here as a prelude to Friday’s final embrace.
It was all part of a leave-taking that Ali saw as a moment to teach and lead once more, including as speakers Christians, Jews, Mormons, Buddhists and Native Americans in an emphatic, if not explicitly spoken, renunciation of sectarianism and embrace of ecumenicism.
“Muhammad indicated that when the end came for him, he wanted to use his life and his death as a teaching moment,” Ali’s widow, Lonnie, said. He was 12 years old when his bicycle was stolen, she noted, and a police officer encouraged him to learn boxing. Teachers believed in him. Friends backed his career.
Named the athlete of the 20th century by Sports Illustrated, Ali never settled for sportsman as his sole identity. Among the first speakers at the memorial was Rev. Kevin Cosby of St. Stephen Church in Louisville, who said Ali had taken his place in history by rejecting the narrative of a country that had, from its earliest days, refused to recognise African-Americans as fully human and full citizens.
“He dared to love black people at a time when black people had a problem loving themselves,” Cosby said. “He dared to affirm the beauty of blackness, he dared to affirm the power and the capacity of African-Americans. He dared to love America’s most unloved race.”
President Barack Obama, in Washington for his daughter’s high school graduation, sent a letter that said Ali’s example had inspired him to think how far he might one day go himself.
“Ali was a radical, even in the most radical of times,” Obama wrote, in a letter read by his senior adviser Valerie Jarrett. “A loud, and proud, and unabashedly black voice in a Jim Crow world. His jabs knocked some sense into us, pushing us to expand our imagination.”