Apple's Macbook Pro and Microsoft's Surface Book might have similar design when the lid closed but let's have a look on the software and hardware to find out the differences!
Macbook Pro vs Surface Book: display and design
While both offering thin designs - Surface Book actually comes with a little lighter weight than the Macbook Pro. The Apple's device has a sleek aluminium casing but the Surface Book offers magnesium allow that does give the elegance.
However, there is a small detail that might become a concern. Surface Book's middle part looks a little odd when opened because of the hinge curled around the back. Microsoft claims it as versatile, ultra thin laptop and it serves a purpose! The display detaches easily from the keyboard so you may get a compact and light tablet to be your drawing surface.
For MacBook Pro, the device offers better UI and it has the best trackpad with an added tech, Force Touch - enabling the laptop to 'sense pressure'.
Apple Macbook Pro 13.3 inch variant offers quality display due to its Retina display feature and 2,560 x 1,600 resolution. It has high color accuracy and super sharp display. Surface Book manages to keep up with Macbook Pro's display features by enhancing the device with bigger screen resolution (3,000 x 2,000) although Apple's can still beat it, in term of brightness.
PixelSense in Surface Book can identify if you are using stylus or finger. Plus, it also scores better than Macbook Pro's Adobe RGB. Microsoft's Surface Book provides a much better contrast ratio with 1,750:1 whilst Macbook Pro only provides 1,000:1 ratio.
Macbook Pro vs Surface Book: software and hardware
Both Surface Book and Macbook Pro deliver powerful performance. Surface Book offers 8 GB RAM and 128 GB internal memory with Intel core i5 as processor and NVIDIA GeForce in the GPU. It is designed for heavy duty. Macbook Pro comes older version, i5 processor, 128 GB storage and 8 GB RAM. However, user can push the specs to 1 TB storage capacity and switch to Core i7
Macbook Pro runs OS X 10.11 El Capitan and Surface Book runs Windows 10. Obviously, both has different OS running but Cortana in Windows 10 equips Surface Book with accurate voice assistant to search your files or write notes.
On the other hand, Siri has not yet been available on desktop and rumor has it that it will arrive in the Macbook Pro 2016. Apple is said to ditch the headphone jack in the next MacBook Pro and currently, the previous version is offered at discounted price, University Herald reported.
MacBook Pro vs Surface Book: Who is the winner?
Both laptops offer beast performance and impressive specs for their OS. However, there is a reason why modern-day ultrathin laptops are eye-ing on MacBook designs. Although Surface Book and other variants have an updated hardware, MacBook Pro has been seen as 'more stable' for daily duty so far. If there is a new range of ultrathin laptops, they could be an alternative to MacBook Pro.