By: Jim Seip Its scouting report on York complete, American Indoor Football will bring a team to the York City Ice Arena in 2013. League CEO John Morris expects York to host all Saturday night games, with its home opener tentatively penciled in for a yet-to-be-determined Saturday in April. The news comes about six months after the Harrisburg Stampede and Virginia Badgers played an April game at the Ice Arena. Stampede ownership said ticket sales before gameday exceeded 800. Using a playing surface fitted specifically fitted for Harrisburg’s Farm Show Arena, the game in York featured a few problems. The carpet bunched up, causing a tripping hazard for players and officials. And Virginia players wiped out in the end zone when the carpet slid away from the ice underneath the playing surface. “Even though it didn’t go perfectly, we received a lot of emails from fans telling us they were happy,” Morris said. “We were really encouraged.” York fans will be involved in naming the team. A news conference is scheduled for 1 p.m. Wednesday at the arena to unveil further details about the team. The league and arena saw spots they could improve. The low ceiling also will create some interesting scenarios for the kicking game. “From the rink standpoint, there were definitely challenges,” York City Ice Arena general manager Mike Cleveland said after April’s game. “With the future plans, there will be less challenges with a year to prepare.” Cleveland did not immediately return a voicemail left on his cell phone Monday. Morris said plans for modifications are already under way. He hopes to remove the ice for games and build floor boxes – which will each seat 16 ticket holders – around the field. Morris hopes the upper-level banquet area, located behind glass, and the new boxes will allow attendance of 1,500 people, he said. Morris has hired a head coach with experience in the league to run the team, but he did not want to reveal his name yet. He did say one-time NFL running back Rafael Cooper (five NFL games in 2002) and defensive back Archie Smith – an eight-year league veteran – will play for York this season. “I took my son, Owen, he’s 7 and an avid football fan,” Emigsville’s Ron Hill said about the one AIF game he attended in York last season. “It was awesome. I had never seen indoor football before (live). It’s very entertaining. It’s high-scoring. It’s fast. “You’re in close proximity to the field and players … the speed of it kept (my son’s) attention. If you look at other sporting events … depending on your seat, you’re not that close to the action. But when you’re in that arena, you’re right on top of the action.” The AIF league schedule ran from March 1 through June 16 this year, and Morris expects the same in 2013. The league lists 11 teams on its website, but it levied an indefinite suspension against one of its franchises – the Ontario (Calif.) Warriors – and arguably its best team, for breaking unspecified violations in May. The league banned the undefeated Warriors from the playoffs and forced the team to forfeit its remaining games. Morris didn’t have an exact number of teams for the 2013 season, but he hopes to field 12 teams, including six (Fayetteville, N.C.; Harrisburg: Maryland; Rochester, N.Y.; Virginia) on the East Coast.