Nashville golfer Lou Graham reflects on his 1975 U.S. Open Golf Championship at Medinah Golf and Country Club near Chicago.
George Walker IV / The Tennessean
Nashville golfer Lou Graham won the U.S. Open at Medina in 1975.(Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)Buy Photo
Lou Graham was fuming after playing in the 1948 Tennessean/Metro Parks Schoolboy Golf Tournament and it had nothing to do with the sweltering early June heat at Shelby Golf Course.
It was because Graham, only 10 at the time, not only failed to make the cut in the tournament, now known as the Schooldays, but also posted a triple-digit score.
And it didn't matter that it was his first tournament.
"When my mother came to pick my brother Marty and I up, we got in the car and she said, 'Louis, what did you shoot?'" Graham said. "And I said, 'I shot — one hundred and thirteen,' just like that. She said, 'That's not bad; you've never played 18 holes before.' I said, 'I don't care — I shot one hundred and thirteen.' I was so mad about it, and I tell people I'm still mad about it today."
Mad enough, in fact, that Graham vowed to improve.
And improve he did. To the point that five years later he claimed the first of three straight Schoolboy championships (1953-55).
It was the beginning of one of the most illustrious careers any golfer from Nashville ever has enjoyed.
The 1956 Father Ryan graduate went on to spend 23 years on the PGA Tour, reaching the pinnacle of his career in 1975 when he won the U.S. Open.
This year marks the 40th anniversary since Graham claimed a two-stroke win over John Mahaffey in an 18-hole playoff at Medinah (Ill.) Country Club. The final round of the 2015 U.S. Open will be played Sunday at Chambers Bay in University Place, Wash.
"It seems more like it was four weeks ago rather than 40 years ago," said Graham, 77, who sat with me Friday and recollected the win that earned him $40,000.
Last year's U.S. Open champion won $1.62 million, about $200,000 more than Graham earned in his entire career.
"The money is better today, the condition of the courses is much better, everything about the game is much better than when I played," Graham said. "But I loved every minute I played on the tour."
The U.S. Open victory, which landed Graham on the cover of Sports Illustrated the following week, was the third of his career.
He had staged a remarkable comeback after falling 11 shots behind the leaders — Tom Watson and Pat Fitzsimons — and into 40th place after shooting a 74 on the first day.
"It was a combination of a lot of different things that I did to start playing better," Graham said. "To be honest, I can't remember one thing in particular that really helped."
Graham jumped into the mix in the third round with a 68, which moved him into a tie for fourth with Ben Crenshaw and Peter Oosterhuis.
"Until this day I've heard it mentioned every year at the (U.S. Open) that was one of the biggest comebacks over 36 holes when Lou Graham came from 11 back," Graham said.
Graham said he and Mahaffey have remained good friends over the years.
In 1977, Graham finished second in the U.S. Open and continued to play in it through 1986.
He has returned only twice since then, going back in 2000 at Pebble Beach and in 2013 at Merion in Ardmore, Penn., for past champions dinners.
Graham has watched much of this year's tournament, which began Thursday, and appreciates the uniqueness of the course at Chambers Bay.
He is not, however, happy about the struggles Tiger Woods is experiencing. Graham has known Woods since before Woods joined the PGA Tour.
"I'm a Tiger fan," said Graham, who sat with Woods at the 2013 U.S. Open past champions dinner. "I hope he gets his game back together; but I don't know if he will. His confidence is his biggest problem right now."
Graham is still an avid golfer, playing about twice a week. He is a member at Richland Country Club, Golf Club of Tennessee and Vanderbilt Legends Club.
"I'm 77 and I can still shoot my age — sometimes," he said.
Former Brentwood pitcher gets second win
Former Brentwood pitcher Robbie Ray, 23, gave up just two hits over seven scoreless innings Monday while leading Arizona to a 7-3 victory over the Los Angeles Angels.
It was his 10th major league start since making his debut in 2014 and fourth this season.
"I didn't throw many off-speed pitches and I just stayed on the fastball and attacked hitters," said Ray (2-1). "Me and my catcher (Welington Castillo) had a game plan going, we stuck to it, and the team was making plays behind me."
Rodgers-Cromartie gives up jersey number for free
It didn't take much for New York Giants rookie safety Landon Collins to get the jersey — No. 21 — he wanted.
All he had to do was ask former Tennessee State cornerback Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie for it.
The former Alabama standout told Rodgers-Cromartie he wanted the number to honor Sean Taylor, a Redskins cornerback who was murdered in 2007. Collins idolized Taylor.
While some veterans ask for something in return for their numbers, Rodgers-Cromartie didn't ask for anything.
Rodgers-Cromartie, who wore No. 45 at TSU, will wear No. 41 this season.
Local college coaches to talk books and basketball
Vanderbilt men's basketball coach Kevin Stallings, Belmont men's coach Rick Byrd and TSU women's coach Larry Joe Inman will be on a Downtown Rotary panel at Wildhorse Saloon on Monday to discuss balancing academics and athletics.
The noon discussion will be moderated by WSMV-4 newscaster Rudy Kalis.
For information about attending, call 615-781-2700 or visit nashvillerotary.org.
Former Franklin wrestler joins Bridgestone UFC event
Dustin Ortiz, a former Franklin High wrestler, has been added to the UFC Fight Night card at Bridgestone Arena on Aug. 8.
Ortiz, 26, will face Ian McCall from Irvine, Cal., in the 125-pound flyweight division.
The main event will feature No. 6-ranked light heavyweight Ovince Saint Preux, a former University of Tennessee linebacker, against No. 5 Glover Teixeira.
Ortiz is ranked No. 11 in his division with a 14-4 career record, and McCall, 31, is No. 4 with a 13-5-1 record.
Ortiz was on the 2005 Franklin wrestling team that won the TSSAA dual state championships.
Predators television play-by-play announcer Pete Weber, who has described plenty of injuries over the years, finds himself today talking about his own.
Weber, recently named Tennessee Sportscaster of the Year by the National Sportswriters and Sportscasters Association, recently underwent surgery on his left shoulder, which has bothered him for many years.
He suffered a hit that dislocated his shoulder while playing soccer in the summer between his sophomore and junior years at Notre Dame in 1971.
Then in 1993 while playing softball, Weber was submarined by "a guy smaller than Walter 'No-Neck' Williams" and landed on his elbow, causing his shoulder to pop out of place again.
"I did all of the rehab that was prescribed at the time, but basically the last five or six years have been really, really difficult as arthritis simply overtook the joint," Weber said.
The surgery was performed by Predators orthopedist Dr. John Kuhn.
Check out Vintage baseball at The Hermitage
What better place to play a vintage base ball game than at a historic site?
The Hermitage will serve as host for a doubleheader Saturday (noon and 2:30 p.m.) between The Hog & Hominy Picked 9 and Maryland's Elkton Eclipse.
For more information, call 615-889-2941 or visit thehermitage.com.
Fred McCrary made two holes-in-one at Sycamore Golf Course over a span of just 15 days.
He had never before made a hole-in-one.
On May 26, McCrary aced the 128-yard, No. 12 hole using a 5-iron. Then on June 9, he aced the 140-yard No. 17 with a 6-iron.
The Columbia State men's basketball team, which has been around since 1966, is having a reunion Friday and Saturday.
All former players, coaches, managers and cheerleaders are invited.
There will be a gathering at the school at 6 p.m. Friday, a family picnic Saturday afternoon and a reunion dance that night.
For details, call Joe Davis at 931-363-7163 or Paul Handley at 931-723-8183.
The MTSU Blue Raider Legends Golf Tournament will be played Friday at Indian Hills.
All former athletes, coaches, managers, trainers and cheerleaders are invited to play. For more information, call Jim Simpson at 615-898-5632.
If you have an item for Midstate Chatter, contact Mike Organ at 615-259-8021 and on Twitter @MikeOrganWriter.