Crystal Palace live score (and video online live stream*), team roster with season schedule and results.'
Crystal Palace is playing next match on 26. Nov 2016 against Swansea City in Premier League.
When the match starts, you will be able to follow
Crystal Palace v Swansea City live score
standings, minute by minute updated live results and match statistics. We may have video highlights with goals and
news for some Crystal Palace matches, but only if they play their match in one of the most popular football leagues.
Crystal Palace previous match was against Manchester City in Premier League, match ended with result 1 - 2
(Manchester City won the match).
Crystal Palace fixtures tab is showing last 100 football matches with statistics and
win/draw/lose icons. There are also all Crystal Palace scheduled matches that they are going to play in the future.
Crystal Palace performance & form graph is SofaScore
Football livescore
unique algorithm that we are generating from team’s last 10 matches, statistics, detailed analysis and our own
knowledge. This graph may help you to bet on Crystal Palace matches, but be aware of that SofaScore LiveScore accepts
no responsibility or liability for any financial or other loss, be it direct or indirect, as a result of any
action reliant on any of this website’s content.
In match details we offer link to watch online
Crystal Palace Swansea City live stream
sponsored by bet365. If this match is covered by bet365 live streaming you can watch Crystal Palace Swansea City
on your PC and on mobile - iPhone, iPad, Android or Windows phone.
Please note that
the intellectual property rights to stream such events are usually owned at a country level and therefore,
depending on your location, there may be certain events that you may be unable to view due to such restrictions.
Current Crystal Palace squad is:
Forwards: Fraizer Campbell, Connor Wickham, Christian Benteke, Loic Remy, Jonathan Benteke, Ben Wynter
Midfilders: Jason Puncheon, James McArthur, Bakary Sako, Wilfried Zaha, Jordon Mutch, Chung Yong Lee, Yohan Cabaye, Andros Townsend, Joe Ledley, Mathieu Flamini, Luke Dreher
Defenders: Damien Delaney, Scott Dann, Joel Ward, Martin Kelly, Pape Souare, Zeki Fryers, James Tomkins
Goalkeepers: Wayne Hennessey, Julian Speroni, Steve Mandanda
You can click on any player from the roster on the right and see his personal information such as nationality,
date of birth, height, preferred foot, position, player value, transfer history etc. There are also statistics
for each player in all competitions with all total played and started matches, minutes played, number of goals
scored, number of cards and much more. Crystal Palace top scorers list is updated live during every match.
SofaScore
football livescore
is available as iPhone and iPad app, Android app on Google Play and Windows phone app.
You can find us in all stores on different languages searching for "SofaScore". Install SofaScore app and
follow all Crystal Palace matches live on your mobile!