87 mins: Willian has two chances to get crosses in, but Norwich are standing firm behind their parked tractor. And now they come on the break! Terry has to be on his mettle with a fine interception.
86 mins: And now Turner has fouled Torres, getting a booking in doing so. It's Chelsea's turn to load the box, but Demba Ba heads it over.
85 mins: Terry goes through the back of Snodgrass and City get a freekick. They load the penalty area but it's cleared.
84 mins: Hazard caught offside as Willian's shot comes in.
83 mins: Chelsea looked irresistible in the first 25 minutes of this second half but, with the exception of Hazard, they've been quite in the match's final quarter.
81 mins: Ivanovic pulls back, I think, Remond. Could and should have been booked for that, which would have been his second yellow.
78 mins: Schurrle volleys it across goal and there's a deflection. Corner.
77 mins: Hazard and Torres link up, Hazard wriggles through the massed defence somehow, shoots and Torres gets on the rebound. Terrible effort Torres! Stop sniggering at the back.
75 mins: Chelsea playing with four forwards now: Willian and Luiz behind Hazard, Ba, Torres and Schurrle. That's creating a bit of space for Norwich, but they've given it away cheaply. How good if Norwich were somehow to pinch this?
74 mins: Luiz and Johnson clash. No bookings.
72 mins: Matic off Torres on. Mourinho settling for the point.
70 mins: And it nearly works out right away! Redmond breaks at speed and feeds Snodgrass. Is this the moment? He's in the clear. But Snodders lacks the ground speed and Cahill can track back and save disaster with a tackle/block.
68 mins: Norwich swap the pace of Nathan Redmond for the ...erm... Elamnder-ness of Elmander.
67 mins: Oh dear, William really is having a mare. Given the ball in the box again, and a bad touch sees a good position go begging.
65 mins: Hazard down the left, backheels to Cole, slipped inside to Matic. Shoots, it's blocked, shoots again and it's a corner. Norwich just about clear it.
63 mins: The Hazard-Schurrle axis delivers another ball in but Chelsea lack presence in the centre forward position.
60 mins: All Chelsea since the half, they should have had at least one and possibly two pens. Hazard making things happen.
58 mins: Norwich have a throw but Bennett is booked for taking too long to take it. Ref's losing the plot a bit here, now Matic makes two clear fouls within as many seconds but is booked for neither.
56 mins: Hazard's into the box, dancing past a few, Ryan Bennett has a big swing at him with his leg but misses completely. That doesn't stop Hazard chucking himself on the ground, but in fairness I think that was at least in part because he thought Bennett might break him in half. Anyway, no penalty becuase the lino has his flag up and I think Terry was offside. Controversial either way. Ivanovic booked for protesting.
55 mins: Chelsea are all over Norwich like a rash. 73% of the ball in this half so far. Hazard's made the difference. Cheslea playing at a higher tempo, too.
53 mins: Ball's cut back to Schurrle on the penalty spot and Tettey slides in on him, recklessly. No penalty. Ref's evened it up now, deliberately or not.
50 mins: Hazard is on fire, Chelsea look a different side with him, he's terrorising the left-sided Norwich defenders. Another cross comes in from him but it's just cut out.
47 mins: Hazard makes a fine start to his afternoon, they cannot get the ball off him, he cuts it inside and here's Luiz with the shot! Hits the bar. Jack Sheppard writes:
Is the special one the manager he used to be? Of course not. This season he just looks like an old man blaming all of his shortcomings on everybody else but himself. It seems like for every tactical masterstroke like that against Manchester City there's a boringly dreadful performance followed by the dummy being thrown out of the pram like against Sunderland.
46 mins: Matic, Chelsea's best player in the first half, trying to get them ticking. Chelsea playing the ball around well, and there's some early possession down the right.
17.02 No rest for the wicked, here's the second half. Two changes for Chelsea: Luiz and Hazard come on. Salah and Lampard, both of whom were quiet, come off.
HT: CHELSEA 0 NORWICH 0 Terry went close with a header, Andre Schurrle with a couple of decent efforts, but it was rather a lacklustre display from Chelsea. Norwich should have had a penalty, what's more. Shaping up to be our second forgettable match of the afternoon, but hope springs eternal, so join me after the break for, I hope, some lovely goals.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Henry Winter - &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23cfc" target="_blank"&gt;#cfc&lt;/a&gt; 0 &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23ncfc" target="_blank"&gt;#ncfc&lt;/a&gt; 0 ht. Olsson appealed for a pen. Schurrle hit post. Johnson changed his shirt. Players slipping. About it. All a bit soporific&lt;/noframe&gt;
45 mins: Erm, well, that's half time.
43 mins: Now will.i.an with a sloppy pass that goes straight out. A couple of moments to forget for him.
42 mins: will.i.an with a run across field and then he hits a rubbish shot that nearly goes out for a throw.
39 mins: The man with no number, Johnson, is allowed time and space in front of the Chelsea goal and he curls in a more than reasonable shot. Deflected behind for a corner, that comes to naught.
35 mins: Norwich, for the second time this afternoon, try a long throw into the box. Erm, guys? Have you seen who plays in the Chelsea defence? Obviously, it's cleared without difficulty.
33 mins: Ooh yeah! Schurrle again, another good run, beats his man and Ruddy makes a smart low save. Wai-Kin Tsui says:
Is Mourinho the manager he once was? Does style matter or is it all about results? To be honest, Mourinho doesn't seem to have changed much. In fact, if he weren't a football coach, one might just say age has turned him sour. Sure, he gets a lot of flak for the often provocative stuff he says in press conferences, but I think the vitriol against him purely for the tactics he employs is unfounded. He tells it as it is - like he did with Liverpool last week - and he isn't afraid to be blunt about his "bus" and its passengers. The press love it, the (non-Chelsea) fans hate it, and Mourinho keeps the job.
31 mins: Lovely play by Schurrle, who picks the ball up on the left and cuts inside. It opens up for the German, Ba making a good dummy run across goal and Schurrle opens up his body to curl the ball past Ruddy... and onto the base of the far post! Matic the architect of that move: breaking up the play with a big tackle and playing his colleague in with a classy ball. What more can you ask of a midfielder?
30 mins: Switched to the right, Salah surges into the box and feeds Ba, who is well blocked by Turner but at the expense of a corner. Dealt with quite easily.
29 mins: Chelsea domainting the ball, and are now moving it out to Cole on the left.
28 mins: Quiet spell, neither side creating anything of note.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Henry Winter - The man with no name and no number on his shirt is Bradley Johnson &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23ncfc" target="_blank"&gt;#ncfc&lt;/a&gt;. Just donned new shirt for his blood-spattered top&lt;/noframe&gt;
23 mins: Norwich have made a most encouraging start, but are nearly undone when they foolishly give John Terry a free header at goal. Luckily for them, the tearful Chelsea skipper directs his header straight at Ruddy. Barry Mitchell writes:
He was never the manager he or the press thought he was/ is. Loves to not play football. Loves to park the bus. Loves to cheat - Porto Uefa cup final 2003. No dignity and has been found out. His record at top european clubs with a rather large budget and wage bill is not outstanding. Brilliant psychologist but no football coach!
I don't think Neil Adams has ever coached in a UEFA Cup final, has he? Oh, right. I see.
20 mins: Willian plays it into Demba Ba's feet but he cannot find the overlapping runner.
19 mins: Excellent cross from Norwich and it flashes across the Chelsea box begging for a touch.
18 mins: Ba has a chance to delvier a ball in but fails miserably.
17 mins: Schurrle with a powerful strike, Russell Martin is the unlucky man who gets it in the chest. Boof.
16 mins: Here's a good one: the Norwich starting XI cost 14 million, the players on the bench double that. That surely suggests that a) some silly transfers have been done and b) the manager isn't too sure who the best team are.
12 mins: Cole down the left, great cross, Ba is just a tenth of a second too slow. Looking at that pen shout again, it might have been Terry actually who made contact not Cole.
10 mins: Olsson makes a great run into the box, Ashley Cole slides in and brings him down! No penalty. Ooh, that is hard lines for the visitors. I think that was a pen. Terry was also sliding it, and both Chelsea's veteran defenders were late with their tackles. That should have been a penalty. The sort of decision you just don't get when you're 18th away at a big team.
7 mins: Perhaps enjoying taking centre stage with Hazard and Oscar sitting this one out, Willian has made a strong start. Nearly slips Ba in with a neat pass.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Samuel Luckhurst - Ba just started mouthing off at Bennett, before he realised it was Turner that bumped into him.&lt;/noframe&gt;
5 mins: Ashley Cole, bombing forward like a stripling, skips past a couple of challenges before being stopped. Turner has elbowed Ba in the breadbasket and the forward tumbles in the penalty area, that's knocked the stuffing out of him. "Old skool, that," says G Nev. Ref didn't see it.
3 mins: Ball lumped in, Turner with an uncertain header clear, Schurrle tries to place the shot from the edge of the area but finds the keeper.
1 mins: Off and running for an untidy start. "Neil Adams is searching for the answer, like so many at the bottom of the league," says Gary Neville. So true Gary. As in football, as in life.
15.59 And these are the Norwich men charged with denying them. Olsson the left back an eye-catching positional selection. Elmander an unenviable task up front on his own.
15.58 Jose has made five changes from his midweek Champs League losers. They go top if they win. And Norwich are down if Chelsea win. Gurreh Neville reckons that Mourinho is laying down the law by benching Hazard and Butch Oscar, telling his creative attacking players that they need to do their share of defensive work as well. Anyway, here is the side he has sent out.
15.55 Hazard getting an award; pretty sure it is the fans' player of the year.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Henry Winter - Hazard on the bench for &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23cfc" target="_blank"&gt;#cfc&lt;/a&gt; today&lt;/noframe&gt;
Maybe Jose wanted him on hand for some tactical advice...
15.45 How do we rate Norwich's chances, then? I'm going for the popular "none", having flirted briefly with "slim". This graphic from Sky Sports 1's excellent coverage, I think, should explain why...
15.40 Not directly related to today's game, but I enjoyed this from Ed Cumming about applying the Mourinho Method to your personal life.
In a restaurant: always have a voucher. In fact, take two vouchers, and argue aggressively if the staff say they can't be used in tandem. Order the food with the lowest markup. Eat at least half of your dish before claiming it is undercooked/overcooked/not what you ordered. Ask for a different dish, repeat the process. Remove optional service charges. If at any point you are bored, complain to your partner that the standard of conversation is not what you expected and shrug.
15.35 Let's get the teams.
Chelsea: Schwarzer, Ivanovic, Cahill, Terry, Cole, Lampard, Matic, Salah, Willian, Schurrle, Ba. Subs: Luiz, Torres, van Ginkel, Hazard, Eto'o, Kalas, Hilario.
Norwich: Ruddy, Martin, Ryan Bennett, Turner, Whittaker, Johnson, Snodgrass, Howson, Tettey, Olsson, Elmander. Subs: Bassong, van Wolfswinkel, Fer, Hooper, Bunn, Elliott Bennett, Redmond.
Referee: Neil Swarbrick (Lancashire)
15.30 Afternoon all. Arsenal eased past West Brom, but it could still be a good day to be a Baggy if Chelsea can beat Norwich. If the Canaries lose, they will be effectively down. Not technically, because they could still finish level with Sunderland, but Norwich's goal difference is far worse so they badly need something from their trip to Stamford Bridge.
Here be John Ley's match preview from earlier...
Chelsea 0-0 Norwich City (ko 16.00)
With the Champions League just a memory, Chelsea can now concentrate on the Premier League, knowing that they can go top with just one game to play with a victory.
And if Manchester City falter at Everton, the prospect of taking the title will improve.
Norwich's future could be shaped at Stamford Bridge.
Their recent away form has been dreadful and another defeat will point them closer to the Championship.
Stat of the game: Norwich have lost their last eight away games in the Premier League.
John Ley's prediction: Chelsea 4 Norwich City 0.
Chelsea (Possible, 4-2-3-1): Schwarzer; Ivanovic, Cahill, Terry, Azpilicueta; Matic, Lampard; Oscar, Willian, Schürrle; Torres.  Out: Cech (shoulder), Ramires (suspended). Tests: Terry (ankle), Hazard (calf), Eto'o (knee), Oscar (hip).
Norwich (Possible, 4-3-1-2): Ruddy; Whittaker, Martin, Yobo, Olsson; Johnson, Howson, Fer; Snodgrass; Van Wolfswinkel, Redmond.  Out: Pilkington (hip). Test: Yobo (calf).
Referee: Neil Swarbrick. Matches: 19, R0 Y68.
Betting: Home 1-5, Away 12-1, Draw 11-2.