Any bets placed prior to the Monday of the tournament will be deemed “Ante Post” and if the player subsequently does not take part all bets on that player will be deemed losers.
If a golf tournament is abandoned or shortened from the advertised number of holes, then the trophy presentation will determine settlement for the following markets - Outright, Place, Top 10, Matches, Groups, Top Nationalities and any other 54/72/90 hole markets provided the following conditions have been met.
1 - 36 Holes of any PGA Tour / European Tour / Champions Tour / LPGA Tour event must have been completed
2 - For any event played over 2 or more courses then all players must have completed an equal number of holes on each course and at least 36 holes overall.
Should no further play take place after a bet is struck then that bet will be deemed void.
All bets will stand on a postponed tournament until the tournament is completed (subject to the above conditions)
Non Runner No Bet - Betfred.com reserves the right to apply a Rule 4 in the event of any Non Runner(s).
Once a player tees off - he is deemed to have taken part in the tournament and is deemed a loser if they retire/withdraw or are disqualified.
Play Offs will determine win bets.  Dead Heat rules may apply to the place part of Each Way Bets.
If a bet is struck and there is no further play, or further play does not count for the official result, those bets will be made void.
A price for the tie will be offered and in the event of a Tie - bets on either player will be deemed losers.
Play Offs do not count and if two players shoot the same tournament score then the tie will be declared the winner.
If one player misses the cut then the other player is deemed to have won.  If both players miss the cut then the player to shoot the lowest pre cut score will be the winner.  If a player is disqualified/withdraws prior to the cut or after both players have made the cut then they are deemed to have lost.  If a player is disqualified/withdraws after making the cut but the opponent has already missed the cut then the player to make the cut is the winner.
If a tournament is abandoned for any reason then wagers will stand providing an official result is announced (and subject to the number of rounds stipulated in 1 being completed), however any wagers placed, after which no further play takes place will be deemed void and stakes returned
Play Offs will determine win bets. &slquo;If applicable a play off will count in determining the winner but otherwise dead heat rules may apply&srquo;
Dead Heat rules may apply to the place part of Each Way Bets.
Rule 4 may apply to groups containing any non runners.
The player shooting the lowest score in that group is deemed to be the winner.
If a selection misses the cut then that selection is deemed a loser.
If all players in a particular group miss the cut the player shooting the lowest score prior to the cut is deemed to be the winner.  Any player that withdraws/disqualified is deemed a loser.
See “outright betting” rules and Dead Heat Rules Apply
See outright betting and Dead Heat rules apply.
The player that records the lowest score over 18 holes will be the winner.
A tie is offered in 2 Ball betting and therefore in the event of a tie both players will be losers.
If a 3 ball results in a tie then Dead Heat rules apply.
A player is deemed a runner once they have teed off.  If a player withdraws prior to teeing off then the 2 Ball or 3 Ball will be deemed void.
If a 2 Ball or 3 Ball is rearranged all bets will stand as per the original groupings.
Players disqualified/withdraw prior to the cut are deemed to have missed the cut.
MDF (modified cut on the PGA Tour) will be settled as making the cut.
If a tournament is shortened and there is no cut then all bets will be void.
The player who shoots the lowest score of the round is deemed the winner. Dead heat rules and Rule 4 will apply should there be any non-runners.  Any player disqualified/ withdraws is deemed a loser.
Prices may be offered on a player's score during a nominated round. If the round in question is not completed then all bets will be void.
The player who scores the lowest score on the hole is the winner. Prices are offered for each player and a tie, therefore if the final scores are level all bets on either player are settled as losers. If the players do not tee off from the correct hole, all bets are void.
Prices are offered on a named player to score either under, over or exactly a number of shots. If the hole is not completed, all bets will be void.