Arsenal managed to steal all three points today, with a questionable winner which will no doubt leave our opponents reeling.
There was little to talk about from the first-half of the match, with many passes being over hit, and both defences clearing up any attacking threats, and the second-half wasn’t much better.
We did manage to create more chances and push up the pitch onto the Clarets much more, but unfortunately could not get that breakthrough goal.
Wenger attempted to chance the destiny of the match away from a draw by bringing on Elneny and Oxlade-Chamberlain, with a disappointing Iwobi making way along with Granit Xhaka.
Burnley even threatened to bag a winner in the match also in the final 20 minutes of the match, but going into the final 10 minutes, the game was still stuck at 0-0.
Minute 85 we saw Theo Walcott place a tremendous effort from outside the box agonisingly close, but again, still no deadlock broken. We continued to fight hard in the final minutes of the game, but our opponents stood firm in defence, and the drab game looked as if it would end with the boring final score that matched the game, but we managed to score in the final seconds of injury time.
A 92nd minute corner gave us the chance to steal all three points, and that we did, although there will be talk of Laurent Koscielny’s final touch being with his hand… An Alexis Sanchez cross was whipped in, for Theo to knock toward the back-post, where Oxlade-Chamberlain and Laurent managed to scuffle the ball into the net, and with no time for Burnley to try and level proceedings.
Alex Iwobi and Mesut Ozil were noticeably below par today, although there was not a huge amount of space given to us from our opponents, but we can take credit in our attitude of continuing until the final whistle, and today it paid off.
As the commentator stated on Sky Sports, these late wins can be the true sign of champions, and with Manchester City having lost earlier on today, we have also closed the gap at the top to only two points.
Were we lucky today? Did we deserve the breakthrough? Can anyone deny we are truly Premier League contenders now?