Are you the next Richard Jones? Could your performing pet give super dog Trip Hazard a run for his money? Now is the time to show us what you’re made of.
We’re travelling the country on the lookout for even more amazing acts for Britain’s Got Talent 2017. If you think you’ve got an incredible talent that might even make Simon Cowell jump up in delight, then we want to see it! Could 2017 be your year to shine? There’s only one way to find out… apply now!
Calling all BGT superfans! How much do you really know about BGT? Take our Flashback Friday quiz below and let us know how you do.
Open auditions are happening now and there is still time to apply! 
Find out more and apply now!
Consider yourself a cracking contortionist? Are there simply no words when it comes to your mime act? It's time to separate the performers from the PERFORMERS and find out if you really have what it takes to make it on Britain's Got Talent 2017. Have a go at the quiz below and see how you get on...
We're holding open auditions in a city near you, find out where here
Think you've got what it takes to be the next Richard Jones?
Applications for the new series of Britain's Got Talent are now open! If you think you've got an amazing talent that'll stun our Judges, then we want to see it!
Click here to complete your application form and show the nation what you can do. Don't forget to check out where we're holding auditions, we might be in a town near you!
Will 2017 be your year? APPLY NOW!
We're STILL on a high from last night's epic BGT Final but were you paying close attention?
If so, test your knowledge below...
After seeing off the rest of the competition, Stephen sits down with your tenth BGT winner Richard Jones to find out how they are feeling after being named the tenth champ…
Stephen Mulhern presents our panel with their winning prediction envelopes following Richard Jones' victory BUT… did any of the Judges make the correct decision and get bragging rights for life?
Watch above to find out…
Some of our favourite acts from the past ten years took to the BGT stage to pay tribute to a decade of finding amazing talent!
But the fun doesn't end there. We're on the lookout for even more incredible talent and we're coming to a town near you soon! Find out where we're holding auditions and apply now for the new series of Britain's Got Talent!