Get Birmingham City FC updates directly to your inbox
While the double-deckers rolled along outside Loftus Road Lukas Jutkiewicz experienced London bus syndrome inside it as his goal extended Birmingham City's unbeaten run to five games.
Until last Saturday the loan striker had not scored in two-and-a-half years but his 23rd minute header was his second in as many games for Gary Rowett's men.
Blues switched off at a corner just before half time to concede their lead - but they held on for a point in the face of an improved second half showing from the home team.
Rowett opted to keep the team changes to a minimum with Jutkiewicz's inclusion for the injured Clayton Donaldson the only alteration to last Saturday's starting line up.
That showed as the visitors looked totally at ease with their system and it was no surprise when they took the lead.
The first quarter had just ended when Blues won a corner which QPR cleared but only as far as Jacques Maghoma on the left wing.
With his right foot Maghoma curled a cross over the back of the defence where Morrison had remained upfield to head back across the six-yard box.
Jutkiewicz was standing totally unmarked from about two yards and all he had to do was nod into the unguarded net.
However, Blues' lead lasted only 16 minutes and Rangers returned the set-piece complement.
Steven Caulker was all alone eight yards out when he powered home a right wing corner to level the score.
Blues didn't really function as an attacking entity in the second period, Jutkiewicz's hooked shot across the face of goal their only real attempt.
By contrast Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink's side were much more potent and it was only the alertness of Adam Legzdins who kept them at bay.
Twice around the hour mark the former Derby keeper had to race out to deny first Tjaronn Chery and then Massimo Luongo.
He also got down well to a late drive from Ariel Borysiuk as Blues settled for a point.
But he was relieved in the final minute when Idrissa Sylla headed Pawel Wszolek's back post cross into the crowd.
Blues were really comfortable for the opening 40 minutes and in truth should have had more than their one goal.
Set pieces being what they are in the Championship, one lapse in concentration allowed Caulker to equalise and the momentum to swing.
As a result the second half was a rearguard action in which Morrison and Shotton stood tall.
Attendance: 13693. The 1,616 Bluenoses enjoyed the better of the first half - and their rendition of 'One Ryan Shotton' completed the defender's redemption.
However, in the second period a pocket of home supporters made most noise as Rangers began to dictate.
Blues are still undefeated in five with two inviting home matches to come.
Inviting that is, if they can sort out the problem of playing at home against lesser lights that blighted them last season
QPR (4-2-3-1): Smithies; Onuoha, Caulker, Hall, Bidwell; Borysuik, Luongo; Cousins (Wszolek 17), Chery, Shodipo (Polter 65); Sylla. Subs: Ingram, Lynch, Washington, El Khayati, Henry.
BLUES (4-4-1-1): Legzdins, Spector, Morrison, Shotton, Grounds; Davis (Robinson 82), Gleeson, Kieftenbeld, Maghoma; Adams (Stewart 60); Jutkiewicz (Storer 86). Subs: Trueman, Cotterill, Wiggins, Brown