Alan Judge had a reason to celebrate at tonight's Football League Awards in Manchester as he made the Football Manager Team of the Season selection. Although Alan missed out on the Sky Bet Championship Player of the Year award to Burnley striker Andre Gary, the Irish midfielder was voted into the Team of the Season across all three divisions.
The team of the season was nominated by local journalists from all 72 Football League clubs before a final 11 was selected by an expert panel. Alan has scored 14 goals and contributed 11 assists in a stellar campaign for The Bees. The Irish midfielder, who picked up a serious leg injury in last week's win over Ipswich Town, is The Bees top scorer and recently picked up his first cap for the Republic of Ireland in their friendly win over Switzerland.
Alan was joined in the Team of the Season by former Brentford striker Andre Gray who had earlier beaten him to the Sky Bet Championship Player of the Year award. Alan was up against Burnley's Gray, and Fulham striker Ross McCormack at the celebration in Manchester for the league's top prize.
It was former Brentford striker Gray who walked away with the award after a spectacular season in front of goal for promotion chasing Burnley. The 24-year-old striker has netted 24 times this campaign, the first two coming for Brentford back in August before his move to Turf Moor as Burnley look for an immediate return to the Premier League under Sean Dyche.
This evening's awards at Manchester Central celebrate the best that the world's oldest football league has to offer. Other winners tonight include:
Kevin Davies Sir Tom Finney Award
Bradley Dack Sky Bet League One Player of the Year
Kemar Roofe Sky Bet League Two Player of the Year
Fulham F.C. Family Club of the Year
George Friend PFA Player in the Community
Marco Matias Goal of the Year
Oskar Pycroft Fan of the Year
Ademola Lookman Championship Apprentice Award
Ben Godfrey League Two Apprentice Award
James Bree League One Apprentice Award
Charlton Athletic F.C. Community Club of the Year