Four years ago, cousins Nick Francis of Toledo and Max Simon of Cleveland went into the haunted-house business together. They were only 16 and 14, respectively, at the time.
It was a national “Good Morning America” haunted-house contest that inspired Francis and Simon to go pro. They gathered the most votes in the contest.
Over the years, their haunted houses have grown bigger and bigger. This year their operation has expanded so much that they need a larger city to hold it.
That’s why Francis, who is 20 today, and Simon, 18, have set up their scary shop in Parma for the first time.
Late last month, Francis and Simon opened The Fear Experience haunted house in a vacant Value City building. It’s at 10701 Brookpark Road, just west of Hauserman and Tiedeman roads.
But it’s not just one haunted house. It’s three in one.
In addition, The Fear Experience features a zombie paintball-shooting gallery, a buried-alive coffin ride and a mini-arcade. There’s also a professional photographer who takes pictures of customers with monsters.
Even those waiting in line are entertained. Discordia, a group of fire entertainers, keeps the place warm. Battlestar, a rock band, plays every night.
On busy nights, the house gives out prizes, like Monster Energy drinks and movie posters, to customers waiting in line.
“We try to make the line as much of an event as the haunted houses themselves,” said Rick Thomas, who helped Francis and Simon upgrade their haunted houses this year.
Thomas said he has been in the haunted house business himself for years but never met anyone like Francis and Simon. He said they are passionate about what they do.
“At their age — to come as far as they have to where they now have a legitimate haunted-house business rivaling all the other haunted houses in Ohio — it’s definitely inspiring,” Thomas said.
Francis said he just enjoys putting on a good show. He said he loves every aspect of haunted houses, from building them to marketing them to managing 1,500 people waiting in line.
“There’s nothing like people paying you to scare them,” said Francis, who is studying economics at Ohio State University. “It’s a ton of fun.”
Francis has been building haunted houses since kindergarten. He started off decorating a room or two in his parents’ Toledo home.
Soon Francis was incorporating whole sections of the house. Then he added the garage and created a haunted trail in the backyard. Tents and shacks were eventually added to the mix.
In 2008, Simon — today a St. Ignatius High School senior — visited Francis from Cleveland. He was impressed with his cousin’s haunted house but wanted to make it bigger.
Soon after, the two learned of the “Good Morning America” contest for home-based haunted houses. They decided to enter.
Francis and Simon built a 3,000-square-foot haunted house in Francis’s backyard. They added 10,000 linear feet of haunted trails. It took about 20 people to operate the haunted property.
A professional company videotaped the house. It looked so authentic that “Good Morning America” producers believed the house was professionally made and disqualified it.
After Francis and Simon convinced “Good Morning America” that they were amateurs, they were allowed back into the contest. Their house received more votes than any in the nation.
However, Francis and Simon didn’t win. The popular vote was just one factor in determining the winner. Judges picked a different house.
Francis and Simon then begged their parents to open their haunted house to the public for one night. Their parents reluctantly agreed. There was no charge but the families received donations for charity.
More than 500 people showed up. Parked cars jammed the Francis’ little residential block.
“The city (of Toledo) called the next morning and said you can’t ever do this again,” Francis said.
So in 2009, Francis and Simon created a haunted house in a vacant grocery store. It drew thousands because there weren’t a lot of haunted houses in Toledo.
The cousins decided to reach a bigger audience by coming to Greater Cleveland. In 2010, they moved into the Soccer Sportsplex in North Olmsted.
Last year, Francis and Simon built two haunted houses in Great Northern Mall in North Olmsted. More than 8,000 people visited.
Francis said they double their attendance every year.
“It’s pretty crazy what’s happening in terms of growth and how far we have come,” Francis said.
Last Halloween, Francis and Simon asked Mushroomhead, a Cleveland-based rock band, to perform at their haunted house in North Olmsted.
It wasn’t just because they liked Mushroomhead’s music. They also knew that band members — including Rick Thomas — had been building and acting in haunted houses for several years.
“I saw in their faces how into it they were,” Thomas said of Francis and Simon. “But they needed guidance as far as how to go to a bigger scale.”
With Thomas, Francis and Simon redesigned all of their rooms. They used furniture and shelves left behind in the Value City store.
Also, this year they will have a “full-contact” haunted house. Actors playing monsters will touch and sometimes grab customers.
In one room, one member of a group of customers will be dragged out and left in a different room. The group will have to find the missing person.
“It’s becoming a very edgy and tense attraction because that’s what people want,” Francis said.
On opening night this year, The Fear Experience drew 500 people, but the number keep rising. Thomas said attendance hit 1,500 on a recent Saturday night.
Francis said he hopes to return to the Value City building in Parma next Halloween.
“We are seeing great numbers,” Francis said. “It’s a good location and the building is perfect.”
The Fear Experience will be open through Nov. 3. The hours are 7 p.m. to midnight on Fridays and Saturdays and 7-10 p.m. on Sundays.
See more Parma news at cleveland.com/parma.