“He was very disappointed about last season but the past is the past. We need him to look forward, believe in his skill and condition and work very, very hard. With confidence and time he will show his value.”
Of his tactical decision to bring on Lamela, Pochettino said: “You always nominate players on the bench who can have an impact and all three subs had an impact on the game.”
Lamela twice came close to capping his impressive display with a goal in the closing stages and is in line to start Sunday’s match with QPR. It is a match in which Spurs will need a much-improved performance to secure a positive result, with Pochettino suggesting complacency may have inadvertently slipped in at the Antonis Papadopoulos Stadium.
“I think it was a very tough game a difficult game, a hard game because he conditions were difficult and the weather was difficult,” he said, referring to the bobbly, cut-up pitch and temperatures or more than 85F.
It had looked for a long while like Pochettino would rue his decision to leave Emmanuel Adebayor, Christian Eriksen, Younès Kaboul, Aaron Lennon and Etienne Capoue at home.
He chose to make seven changes from the side that won 1-0 at West Ham, including giving summer signing Ben Davies his debut and the late-returning World Cup duo of Vertonghen and Paulinho their first run-out of the campaign. This was seen as a good opportunity to get the pair back in action, but their rustiness was ruthlessly exposed inside 14 minutes.
The duo were involved as Spurs inexplicably gave up possession in their own half, with Sardinero racing through to shoot low past Hugo Lloris. It was a fine finish from the Spaniard but one completely against the run of play, given Spurs had not only bossed possession up until that point but had chances as well.
Soldado should have given Spurs the lead after five minutes, only to shoot horribly wide from close range, albeit off-balance, Paulinho also missed the target and Kane struck a 30-yard free-kick just over before Sardinero’s opener, which left Spurs visibly shell-shocked.
Things continued shakily until Lamela’s introduction, and he set up the equaliser less than two minutes after coming on. The Argentine floated a wonderful ball to the edge of the box for Soldado, who struck home a first-time effort in front of the visiting support. It was a fine goal and one which was followed-up six minutes later by another. Lamela was again the architect, playing through Kane to strike into the top left-hand corner.
“I’m happy with the performance,” Pochettino said. “In the end 2-1 for us is an important result for us. It is true that in the first half we started to make mistakes, but in general, I am happy and looking forward to the next game, on Sunday.”
AEL Limassol Fegrouche; Sielis, Soares Tavares, Ferreira De Sousa, Lacerda da Silva, Guidileye, Lima da Silva, Nikolaou, Sardinero (Tavares de Olivera 81), Gikiewicz (Tagbajumi, 73), De Lima Barcelos (Eleftheriou 67). Subs Nadeau, Stavrou, Andres Romero, Espana.  Goal Sardinero 14. Booked Ferreira De Sousa.
Tottenham Hotspur Lloris; Vertonghen, Dier, Naughton, Davies, Paulinho (Chadli 59), Holtby (Dembele 66), Townsend (Lamela 72), Bentaleb, Soldado, Kane.  Subs Sandro, Friedel, Dawson, Rose. Goals Soldado 74, Kane 80. Booked Holtby, Soldado, Davies.
Referee M De Sousa (Portugal).  Att 8,350.