The former Mis-Teeq singer triumphed over ex-EastEnders actor Matt di Angelo in the live final of the hit show, just as the bookies had predicted.
After 29-year-old Alesha had dazzled judges and viewers, host Bruce Forsyth told her: "You could be Britain's Beyonce."
But last night it was revealed that Alesha has been secretly dating runner up Matt di Angelo, who is torn between the Mis-teeq singer and his own glamourous dance partner Flavia Cacace.
While former EastendersMatt and Alesha have done their best to keep the budding romace quiet, it has been revealed that the two have been spotted dating.
However, insiders on the hit show have also said that the Matt and his dancing partner Flavia have become "inseparable".
The chemistry between the two is said to have been one of the reasons for  Flavia's split with her boyfriend.
A friend told the Sunday Mirror: "Matt's going giddy because he thinks both girls are fantastic.
"He's flirting with Alesha non-stop behind the scenes and has been out with her.
"I wouldn't like to bet on which one Matt will end up with. The truth is, he doesn't know. They are both absolutely beautiful and he fancies them both."
Even Matt's Grandad has added to the rumour mill, telling the paper that he had heard about his grandson's fling with Alesha.
He said: "One of Matt's brothers told me he had something going on with Alesha. She told him that she liked him.
"They went on one date to a club but they got spotted by someone who knew them and got scared their relationship would be found out.
"They've been a bit more careful since. I knew it was affecting him because he was appearing on Strictly with stubble, looking a bit rough around the edges."
Last night, when it was revealed she had won the glitterball trophy, Alesha leapt around the studio in her low-cut, royal blue sequined dress and kissed her professional dance partner, Matthew Cutler, telling him: "I love you."
And later, backstage, she said: "I can't believe it. I feel like I'm going to wake up and it was just a dream.
"It was worth all the bruises, all the lack of sleep, all the painful cuts and sore joints, all the tears and all the 380 hours of training.
"I have spent more time with Matthew than with my family. I'm going to keep dancing – and with Matthew if that's OK."
Forsyth had heaped praise on her, saying: "You could become the biggest female star in this country. What an act you could be!"
And Cutler added: "You are a star in the making.
"You've worked so hard. You are just like a professional dancer. You give 150 per cent. You are a sheer joy. We've been training from ten in the morning until ten at night. I'd like to thank Alesha for being so dedicated."
Runner-up Matt hugged his dance partner, Flavia Cacace, and apologised for not winning. "Alesha's a phenomenal dancer and I'm really happy for her," he said.
"It's been loads of fun and I've had a good time and that's the main thing. I hope that young people out there go out and dance."
The evening began with the two couples performing three dances each, watched by an audience at the BBC's White City, London, studios that included comedian David Walliams, newsreader Sophie Raworth, Newsnight's Jeremy Paxman, actress Pauline Quirke and TV host Vernon Kay.
Alesha sneaked ahead with her waltz and cha-cha-cha, getting 77 out of 80 points, two points ahead of Matt's American smooth and salsa dances.
The couples' biggest test came with a dance for
a song chosen by judges Bruno Tonioli, Len Goodman, Craig Revel Horwood and Arlene Phillips.
They tied with 35 points each after Alesha's jive and Matt's quickstep – which included a parody
of Bruce Forsyth's trademark foot shuffle. Alesha earned praise from Mr Goodman, the chief judge, who said:
now, when people have asked me
who the best dancer was I've said Jill Halfpenny [the actress who won the 2004 competition] but now I'll say Alesha Dixon."
The interludes featured all the other contestants who had been eliminated during the series, including Stephanie Beacham and Kate Garraway, but the loudest cheer was reserved for Kelly Brook, who withdrew after her father died following a battle with cancer.
The couples' last chance to impress came with the freestyle showdance. Both couples did a stunning series of lifts and twirls, with Matt dancing to Lenny Kravitz's Are You Gonna Go My Way?, and Alesha choosing Bonnie Tyler's Holding Out For A Hero.
There was also a guest appearance by the Spice Girls, who performed Two Become One.
Earlier, Alesha revealed the extent of her panic attacks while dancing, saying: "Being on stage drags up
all these emotions. I can't breathe, you run out of saliva and no matter
how much water you drink it's never enough. It's the worst feeling in the world.
"You suddenly become aware that millions of people are watching you. It's always affected me. When I was in the band, I had much worse stage fright than anyone else."
Performing five dances took a great physical toll on the finalists but Alesha had the advantage of being a former athlete.
As a youngster, she had competed for her county, Hertfordshire, at 200 metres and in the 4x100metres relay.