Cagliari Calcio are an altogether unremarkable football club.  For much of their existence they have been a yo-yo team, alternating between promotion and relegation and oftentimes languishing in the rustic depths of  the Serie C, the third tier of Italian football.  In their 93 years of existence they have conquered just one piece of silverware, a lone Scudetto won in 1970.  In those brief glory years they were led by the inspirational Gigi Riva, the all time leading goalscorer of the Italian National team. Since their latest promotion to the top flight in 2004 they have managed to stave off relegation but have been in a perpetual state of purgatory; too far off the top to the table to harbor realistic European ambitions, yet too far from the bottom to risk a return to Serie B.  Their record is, for the most part, unexceptional. Yet in a curious episode long forgotten in the annals of football history, for a brief period of time they were known as the Chicago Mustangs.  For one fleeting summer, Cagliari Calcio, the team from the picturesque Mediterranean island of Sardinia, used Comiskey Park on the South Side of Chicago as their home ground.  This is their story.
Cagliari Calcio, 6th in the previous edition of Serie A, were renamed the Chicago Mustangs. Supposedly teams were allocated to cities based on their ethnic makeup, and given Chicago’s substantial Italian community in this case the decision appears logical.  The same cannot be said, however, of placing an Uruguayan team in New York or a Brazilian team in Houston.
The opening match set the tone for the rest of the season. The Mustangs drew their next two matches and only got their first victory in their fourth fixture, a 3-2 victory over the New York Skyscrapers (Uruguay’s Club Atlético Cerro). They had blown a 2-0 halftime lead in five second half minutes, but were rescued in the 72nd minute by Roberto Boninsegna’s individual effort. Boninsegna was without a doubt the Mustangs’ star performer of the campaign.  He was the leading goalscorer of the USA with 10 goals and 1 assist, giving him 21 points in total as goals were worth double.  Two years after his stint with the Mustangs he would transfer to Internazionale and go on to feature in the 1970 World Cup, where he scored Italy’s only goal in the famous 4-1 final defeat to Brazil at the Azteca and twice finished as top scorer in Serie A.
The Mustangs in action at home against the Detroit Cougars.  Note the empty stands.
The crowd trouble in New York was a sign of things to come in Toronto just several days later.  A season-high 15,178 people showed up to the University of Toronto Stadium to witness Hibernian of Scotland, playing as Toronto City, take on the Mustangs.  Once again there were plenty of boisterous Italians in attendance.  Toronto took the lead within 40 seconds but Boninsegna equalized in the second half.  The game was becoming an increasingly violent affair.  Toronto’s Peter Cormack, in the book Summer Of ’67: Flower Power, Race Riots, Vietnam and the Greatest Soccer Final Played on American Soil, recalls: