Cristhian Stuani's sublime double sealed victory for Middlesbrough at the Stadium of Light, as David Moyes' pointless start to life in charge of Sunderland continued.
Stuania unleashed a blistering long-range effort that dipped just under the crossbar after 12 minutes to put the visitors ahead, before rounding off a team move to double Boro's advantage on the stroke of half time following unselfish play from Alvaro Negredo.
Patrick van Aanholt pulled one back with 20 minutes remaining, but Sunderland could not find a way to draw level despite piling forward in the closing stages.
Middlesbrough win the North East bragging rights and more importantly the three points as they hold on to maintain their unbeaten start while winning their first Premier League away game for eight years.
More boos greeted Sunderland at the final whistle from their fans (the ones that remained inside the stadium) and you can read more on the game on the homepage.
For now though attention turns towards the Olympic Stadium and the venue's first Premier League game as West Ham United host Bournemouth. Join me on this link for all the action. I'll see you there!
90+1min: There will be three minutes of stoppage time as Dave Nugent comes on to replace Alvaro Negredo.
88min: Just two minutes left and rather than defending desperately for the in, Middlesbrough are now looking as comfortable as they have all game as they prepare a final substitute.
85min: It's the time of the game where with this score you would expect Sunderland to be heavily pressing Middlesbrough for a winning goal.
The Black Cats are not creating many chances though - certainly not as much as that 10-minute spell where Van Aanholt scored their first -  and Middlesbrough are now looking good to hold on for three points.
82min: Meanwhile it's a second change for Middlesbrough as Daniel Ayala replaces Nsue. Boro have at the very least weathered the Sunderland attacking storm as they gain a spell of possession
81min: Some history this afternoon as Joel Asoro comes off the bench to become Sunderland's youngest Premier League player having turned 17 in April. Duncan Watmore makes way.
4 - Patrick van Aanholt (4) has scored more Premier League goals in 2016 than any other defender. Lifeline.
74min: Middlesbrough have crumbled. Now roared on by the home fans, Sunderland are continuing to batter their North East rivals as a low Van Aanholt cross into the box somehow skips across the face of goal without a touch.
Seconds later Guzan fumbles another low shot but Donald Love can only tap this rebound wide.
71min: Now it gets interesting! Duncan Watmore's low powerful shot is saved by Guzan but he can only parry the ball into the path of Patrick van Aanholt who converts the rebound.
70min: Well there's a first for everything. No not a Sunderland, goal but a failed Middlesbrough break.
Alvaro Negredo races in behind the Sunderland defence into the box following a through ball, but he is fumbled by Vito Mannone at his fee before he can get a shot away.
68min: I will be amazed if this game continues at this rate and Sunderland don't score. They are all over Middlesbrough!
Duncan Watmore and Steven Pienaar combine well on the left before the former is well tackled inside the box.
The ball falls for a Black cats team-mate whose shot is once again blocked.
65min: The Middlesbrough defence may be too deep but it's hanging on, just.
Another Sunderland attack results in a cut-back finding Jermain Defoe, whose shot is crucially blocked by Ben Gibson.
63min: This is much better from Sunderland - in a creative sense at least because they still can't finish.
Duncan Watmore fires in a low cross which is begging to be tapped home before Adnan Januzaj recycles the attack and fires over the bar.
Middlesbrough's defence is far too deep right now.
60min: On the hour and the Sunderland pressure is rising. Patrick van Aanholt lets fly with a powerful effort across goal, but Brad Guzan gets vital fingertips to it to push it wide.
59min: On comes Adomah as Gaston Ramirez makes way for Aitor Karanka's outfit.
57min: Middlesbrough are preparing their first change, with Albert Adomah stripped down ready to come on.
54min: Sunderland are looking more dangerous than they were in the immediate minutes before the break. Lynden Gooch is the braver in a battle with Adam Forshaw to win the ball in the centre midfield before he charges forward and sees a powerful shot blocked.
51min: This might wake those young Black Cats up though. Huge shouts from the home fans go up as Defoe goes down inside the box under pressure from Antonio Barragan, but no penalty is given.
There was very little contact - certainly not enough to trouble Defoe - so it looks like the correct call from the referee.
Unfortunately their team couldn't produce a performance to keep them awake neither.
It's an attacking one too. Jeremain Lens comes on for Paddy McNair, as he moves into the attack alongside Jermain Defoe.
Both have seen plenty of the ball in the first half but it's fair to say Stuani's time on it has been much more productive for his side...
0 - Sunderland's didn't attempt a single shot on target in the first half against Middlesbrough. Worry.
Welcome back to the Premier League, David Moyes. it's like he never left...
Sunderland started like a train and were unfortunate to fall behind. But since John O'Shea's unfortunate injury they have laboured and crucially been punished by clinical attacking from Middlesbrough.
2 - Both of Middlesbrough's goals in this match have been scored by Cristhian Stuani & assisted by Álvaro Negredo. Partnership.
45min: A second attack from Middlesbrough - and a second goal! It's another stunning strike too but for different reasons. A slick passing move cuts up the Sunderland defence, before Alvaro Negredo unselfishly cut-s the ball across goal for Cristhian Stuani to slam home into the roof of the net.
44min: As this half has worn on, Middlesbrough have started to see more and more of the ball - and it's noticeable to see Sunderland's pressing has dropped off.
'Where are Sunderland's Special Ks? The four players instrumental in keeping them up - Khazri, Kirchhoff, Kaboul and Kone - all missing today for various reasons, and it is showing.'
39min: Sunderland are finding a second wind in their search for an equaliser as they win a corner on the left, with Gooch's delivery headed just wide by Papy Djilobodji.
37min: More Sunderland misery. John O'Shea has gone down injured and he will not be able to continue.
So on comes Steven Pienaar for his debut following his Everton release this summer.
34min: More groans. Jermain Defoe races behind the Middlesbrough back four to collect the ball, but from an angle on the left he attempts to play in a team-mate only to roll the ball into the arms of Middlesbrough keeper Brad Guzan.
31min: Sunderland appear to have gone off the boil in the last five minutes. Middlesbrough have even started to string two passes together. There are a few groans from the home fans as their side continue to frustrate.
25min: Januzaj has looked lively on the Sunderland right and he draws a foul from Adam Clayton, with the Boro defender picking up the game's first yellow card.
22min: Jermain Defoe slices wide for the hosts before Adnan Januzaj's low cross somehow fails to pick out a team-mate as Middlesbrough desperately clear their lines again.
19min: The Black Cats are still pressing for an opening goal. In truth since scoring Middlesbrough haven't had a worthy attack - I'm amazed Boro are even in front.
16min: What a hammer blow that is too Sunderland though. They dominated the first 13 minutes but that Boro strike has stunned them.
13min: What a strike! Middlesbrough have hardly had an attack, but when they do eventually come forward it's well worth the wait!
Cristhian Stuani collects a pass from Alvaro Negredo before unleashing a thunderbolt from 35 yards across goal and into the top corner.
11min: Sunderland well on top inside the first 10 minutes. A low cut-back into the box falls for Jermain Defoe but before he can shoot, Antonio Barragan hacks clear.
8min: Half chance for Sunderland, as Lynden Gooch's cross from the left towards the far post is just too far in front of Adnan Januzaj, who acknowledges the cross with a thumbs up.
5min: Aside from a punch to the face, no huge drams in the opening moments of the match.
This may be a derby in name but it's not caught the imagination of the locals. There are a fair few empty seats inside the Stadium of Light.
2min: Less fierce than the Wear-Tyne derby? You try telling that to Middlesbrough'a Alvaro Negredo who has just taken an innocous forearm to the face from Sunderland's Papy Djilobodji.
He will be fine to continue but what a way to start the game.
Remember to get the most out of our live coverage by following all the action with Sportsmail's excellent Match Zone.
It features the latest line-ups, formations, match stats and a handy player comparison tool.
In addition there are heat zones for EVERY player as well as detailed maps of all the goals as they go in. Click on the above link for more.
'You've got to fancy the visitors here. That Sunderland team-sheet is as weak as I can remember in recent seasons.
'Boro were impressive for an hour against Stoke last week but they'll need more belief in the final third if they're to take victory today.'
It's not quite the ferocity of a Wear-Tyne derby, but it will be the biggest in the North East this season as the teams emerge from the tunnel. Middlesbrough are in their navy blue change kit.
2012 - If Sunderland are looking to win three Premier League games in a row at the Stadium of Light since February 2012. Opportunity.
Manager Aitor Karanka has confirmed that the summer arrival from Manchester United picked up an injury during the week, and although it's not thought to be serious, does rull him out this aftrenoon.
Another new arrival, Brad Guzan from Aston Villa, replaces him.
The second of course is West Ham United's first home Premier League game at the Olympic Stadium, when they take on Bournemouth at 4pm.
It looks like bad news for the Hammers though, with Bournemouth appearing to have scored before kick-off...
There are three for Sunderland who hand first starts to summer signings from Manchester United Paddy McNair and Adnan Januzaj. While there is a debut for Papy Djilobodji following his arrival for Chelsea.
Younes Kaboul drops out following his switch to Watford while Lamine Kone and Fabio Borini also depart.
There are alos three alterations of Middlsbough as Brad Guzan replaces Victor Valdes in goal while, Adam Forshaw and Cristhian Stuani come in for the Albert Adomah and the injured Marten de Roon.
Sunderland: Mannone, Van Aanholt, Djilobodji, Love, McNair, Gooch, O'Shea, Rodwell, Januzaj, Defoe, Watmore.Subs: Khazri, Pickford, Lens, Pienaar, Asoro, Tom Robson, Josh Robson.
Middlesbrough: Guzan, Friend, Gibson, Ramirez, Barragan, Clayton, Forshaw, Nsue, Downing, Stuani, Negredo.Subs: Konstantopoulos, Ayala, Fischer, Baptiste, De Sart, Adomah, Nugent.
TEAM NEWS | Here's how #Boro will line up to face @SunderlandAFC today. #UTB pic.twitter.com/4ojQ7KeIlm
Mannone, Van Aanholt, Djiliobodji, O’Shea, McNair, Love, Rodwell, Gooch, Watmore, Januzaj, Defoe.
But who starts for the Black Cats? Team news from both sides will be coming up next...
Even after just two games there are only four teams with a 100 per cent record, but who would have thought Hull City would be one of those along with Manchester City, Manchester United and Chelsea?
Because while Sunderland vs Newcastle United is no more (for now) due to the Toon's relegation, we have a replacement.
Step up Middlesbrough who are back in the Premier League for the first time since 2009.
Boro travel to the Stadium of Light today to contest the Wear-Tees derby and help get Sunday's top flight action underway.
So good afternoon all and welcome to Sportsmail's coverage of Sunderland vs Middlesbrough.
Follow Sportsmail's coverage of the Premier League as Sunderland host Middlesbrough at the Stadium of Light to get Sunday's top flight action underway.
It's the first Wear-Tees league derby since 2009 following Boro's promotion back to the top flight as both sides hope to pick up their first wins of the campaign.
Aitor Karanka's side drew 1-1 with Stoke City on the opening day of the season while Sunderland slipped to a late 2-1 loss at Manchester City.